In the event there is a disagreement as to whether a conflict of interest exists, the Vice-
President, Academic and Provost or her/his designate will decide the matter and the remedy will follow, accordingly.
Decisions of the Vice-President, Academic and Provost or her/his designate can be challenged through the grievance
procedure.
3.35.3 The term “individual” in this Article includes
Members of the Bargaining Unit and management representatives.
SESSIONAL MEMBERS
ARTICLE 4.10 – APPOINTMENT PROVISIONS FOR
SESSIONAL MEMBERS
4.10.1 The Parties recognise that the University's mission is best served by a largely full-time faculty and that it is not
generally desirable to make sessional appointments a substitute for full-time faculty.
4.10.2 At the same time, the Parties recognise that sessional faculty add a significant level of diversity, expertise and
practical experience to the University, and their value must be recognised in the governance and decision- making
processes and generally in the on- going life of the University.
4.10.3 Teaching/professional librarianship/archival management duties comprise the only assigned function for Sessional
Members.
ARTICLE 4.15 – APPOINTMENT AND RENEWAL FOR
SESSIONAL MEMBERS
Seniority of Sessional Members
4.15.1 Sessional Members shall be deemed to have
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 39

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Seniority with respect to a particular
Department/School at the time they are appointed to teach for the third (3rd) academic year within that
Department/School in the last six (6) academic years (July to June).
4.15.2 Each Department/School shall maintain a single roster listing the names and e-mail addresses of Sessional
Members who have
Establishment and Sessional Members who have Seniority. The roster shall also list the courses each Member on the
roster has taught and list the Member’s establishment.
4.15.3 Sessional Members may request leave from the roster for up to two (2) consecutive years.
Such application shall be made annually to the Dean/University Librarian and shall not be unreasonably refused.
4.15.4 Sessional Members on the roster shall be given first right of consideration for available sessional contracts.
4.15.5 The names of Sessional Members on the roster shall be included with the
Department/School faculty listings, on the
University website.
Establishment of Sessional Members
4.15.6 Sessional Members shall be deemed to have
Establishment with respect to a particular course at the time they are appointed to teach it for the third (3rd) academic
year. Such sessional contracts need not be in consecutive academic years, but in no case shall exceed the previous six
(6) academic years. Establishment is specific to the medium, location, and the language of instruction.
Where a course is replaced by a renamed, renumbered, or revised (e.g. a six (6) credit course divided into two (2) three
(3) credit courses) version of what is essentially the same course, establishment shall be maintained.
For the purpose of calculating Seniority and
Establishment, cross-listed courses (e.g.
JURI/LBST 3616EL) shall be deemed to
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 40

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 belong to both Departments/Schools. Courses with no Department/School affiliation
(e.g.
STAT 2126EL) shall be deemed to belong to all Departments/Schools with programs in which they are required. Where
the academic unit housing a particular course has changed due to the restructuring of programs,
Departments or Schools, the Member’s
Seniority and Establishment apply within all relevant units.
4.15.7 Retirees shall be deemed to have
Establishment with respect to a particular course either at the time they are appointed to teach a course for the third (3rd)
academic year on sessional contracts or at the time they are appointed to teach it on a first sessional contract after having
taught the course twice as part of their full-time workload. Such sessional contracts or teaching need not be in
consecutive academic years, but in no case shall exceed the previous six (6) academic years.
4.15.8 Establishment shall not be exercised if a
Sessional Member has removed her/his name from the roster by submitting a written request to the Dean/University
Librarian, or has declined an offer of appointment for a third
(3rd) consecutive academic year. Offers of appointment that are made outside of the dates identified in Article 4.15.9 shall
not be considered for this Article.
4.15.9 Sessional Members with Establishment and most years of teaching service at Laurentian
University shall have the right of first refusal.
This shall apply for the first two sections of the course. The Member shall have first choice of available sections. If other
sections are not filled by the roster, the member shall have priority over the remaining sections before advertising
externally. Such Members shall be offered available courses by April 1 for
Fall/Winter session and by October 1 for
Spring/Summer session.
Appointment of Sessional Members of the
Bargaining Unit
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 41

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
4.15.10 Appointments of Sessional Members are made by the Dean/University Librarian, on behalf of the Employer, on
the written recommendation of the majority of the
Department/School concerned or by the majority of a committee consisting of no fewer than three (3) Members after
scheduled minuted meeting(s). Where the
Dean/University Librarian, on behalf of the
Employer, decides not to follow the recommendation of the Department/School concerned, she/he will provide written
reasons for her/his decision.
4.15.11 When courses cannot be made part of full- time Members’ normal teaching loads or as overloads, these courses
shall be offered by the Department/School in the form of sessional contracts.
Roster/Internal applicants
4.15.12 Sessional appointments not filled by
Established Members shall be made from the roster subject to the provisions of Article
4.15.13. This will enable appointments to be made expeditiously and at the same time in a way that honours Sessional
Members'
Seniority.
4.15.13 The Department/School shall notify by e-mail all Sessional Members on their roster of the available courses in
their Department/School in all sessions for the upcoming academic year. This shall be done by April 7 for the
Fall/Winter session and by October 7 for the
Spring/Summer session.
Sessional Members interested in teaching any of the available courses shall email an expression of interest and a current
curriculum vitae to the Chair/Director of the
Department/School by April 21 for the
Fall/Winter session and by October 21 for the
Spring/Summer session.
The Department/School recommendation shall be submitted to the Dean/University
Librarian by May 5 for the Fall/Winter session and by November 4 for the Spring/Summer session.
If the Department/School cannot find any qualified Members on the roster for a particular contract, written reasons for the
decision must be provided to the
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 42

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Dean/University Librarian with a copy to the
Union.
Approval to advertise externally rests with the
Dean/University Librarian and may not commence until the completion of the internal process.
External Applicants
4.15.14 When a Sessional appointment cannot be filled through the roster, the unassigned course shall be posted on the
Laurentian
University website and may also be advertised externally by May 19 for the Fall/Winter
Session and by November 18 for the
Spring/Summer session. A copy of the advertisement for sessional positions shall be sent to the Union prior to posting on
the website.
A letter of application, curriculum vitae, and any relevant supporting documentation shall be submitted to the
Department/School by
June 2 for Fall/Winter session and December
1 for the Spring/Summer session.
The Department/School recommendation shall be submitted to the Dean/University
Librarian by June 16 for Fall/Winter session and by December 15 for the Spring/Summer session.
4.15.15 In exceptional circumstances where appointments must be made shortly before, or even after, the
commencement of instruction, and where time does not allow full compliance with the above procedures (e.g., in cases of
illness of a Member originally scheduled to teach; opening of a new section of a course(s); unanticipated commencements
of
Leaves of Absence), the Employer shall respect the Seniority and Establishment of
Members prior to seeking external candidates.
The Employer shall inform the Union of each appointment made under this Article and the circumstances.
Written Offer of Appointment of Sessional Members
4.15.16 The Parties agree that Offers of Appointment shall be sent by e-mail to Sessional Members by the following
dates: June 30 for the Fall
Term, September 30 for the Winter Term, and
January 15 for the Spring/Summer Term.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 43

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Each Offer of Appointment shall specify the course number(s), the number of credits, terms and conditions of employment
including salary, benefit, Establishment/Seniority, deemed hours and cancellation conditions if applicable.
4.15.17 A link to the current Collective Agreement shall be sent with every offer of employment.
The Employer shall also issue at no charge, a hard copy to individual Members upon request by the Member.
4.15.18 A copy of each accepted Offer of Appointment shall be sent to the Union within fifteen (15) days of the Employer’s
receipt.
Grievance of Appointment Decision of Sessional
Members
4.15.19 All applicants from the roster shall be notified of the appointment decision. In the event that an unsuccessful
applicant for a sessional teaching position believes that someone else was appointed to the position in violation of the
provisions of this Collective Agreement, she/he may request within one (1) month of the notification, a review of the
appointment with the view of establishing whether the
Employer acted in accordance with the provisions of this Collective Agreement when not appointing the unsuccessful
applicant.
4.15.20 Such a request for review shall be directed to the Dean/University Librarian and/or the Union and shall involve
initially an informal stage in which the Dean/University Librarian and a
Grievance Officer appointed by the Union have an opportunity to review the available information. If agreement cannot be
reached at the informal stage, the matter shall be dealt with according to the grievance procedures set out in Article 11.10
– Grievance
Procedure.
ARTICLE 4.25 – WORKLOAD PROVISIONS FOR
SESSIONAL MEMBERS
4.25.1 (a) If, once a contract has been executed, the workload of a Sessional Member must be altered, the agreement of
the
Member must be obtained.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 44

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
(b) Once a contract has been executed with a Sessional Member such a contract shall not be cancelled in order to have
the duties performed by a
Faculty Member with a full-time appointment.
(c) Cancellation prior to its commencement of a course for which contract with a
Sessional Member has been executed can occur only in accordance with cancellation Article provisions contained in the
contract.
(d) Cancellation Articles shall be used only where there is good reason to believe that enrolment levels may be
vulnerable.
In the event of a cancellation the
Employer shall:
(i) Attempt to find work of equivalent value for which the
Sessional Member is qualified; and failing this
(ii) Shall pay a cancellation fee of fifteen percent (15%) of the agreed salary as outlined in the
Letter of Appointment.
(iii) Members who conduct instruction through distance education delivery modes shall be paid two hundred and fifty
dollars ($250).
Sessional Members shall accrue
Sessional Seniority for all cancelled courses once they have achieved establishment. Cancelled courses shall not count
toward establishment.
4.25.2 The contracts issued to Sessional Librarians and Archivists shall identify in reasonable detail the hours during
which the work is to be performed. These hours cannot be changed without the consent of the Member. The librarian pay
equivalent shall be deemed to be
126 hours per 3 course credits of pay.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 45

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
4.25.3 The workload of a Sessional Member shall normally not exceed twelve (12) credits per
Fall/Winter session (September to April) and nine (9) credits per Spring session (May to
August). Courses delivered through distance education modes do not count in these totals.
There is no maximum course load or enrolment limit for individuals who conduct instruction through distance education
delivery modes.
ARTICLE 4.30 – TEACHING RIGHTS AND
RESPONSIBILITIES FOR SESSIONAL MEMBERS
4.30.1 Sessional Members shall be covered by the general provisions regarding teaching and professional librarianship
and archival management in Articles 5.15.5 to 5.15.18 of
Article 5.15 – Rights, Responsibilities and
Duties of Academics except for specific
Articles within this section that clearly apply only to full-time faculty.
4.30.2 The Chair/Director of the Department/School shall structure the procedures required by this responsibility in a
reasonable manner.
4.30.3 The Chair/Director of the Department/School shall make procedures regarding Sessional
Members a matter of record.
4.30.4 Sessional Members shall have the right to attend Departmental/School meetings. In terms of voting rights,
Sessional Members shall have the right of up to two (2) voting representatives as elected annually by the
Sessional Members teaching in the respective
Department/School. The number of sessional voting representatives shall be determined by the number of full-time
Members in the
Department/School as follows:
One (1) to Nine (9): One (1) Sessional voting representative
Ten (10) and over: Two (2) Sessional voting representatives
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 46

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
ARTICLE 4.35 – ANNUAL REPORT FOR SESSIONAL
MEMBERS
4.35.1 Sessional Members shall submit brief annual reports in electronic format to the
Dean/University Librarian. These reports shall include a current curriculum vitae as well as a current teaching dossier as
defined in Article
5.50 – Assessment of a Member’s
Performance. At their discretion, Sessional
Members may also include material related to their scholarly or creativity activity, professional development, university
governance, outside professional activities, and service to the community.
ARTICLE 4.40 – WITHDRAWAL OF SENIORITY FOR
SESSIONAL MEMBERS
4.40.1 The rights established by the provisions for seniority as described above may be altered or revoked in the event
that the teaching performance of a Sessional Member is found to be unsatisfactory. Action that may affect the seniority
rights of a Sessional Member may be initiated by the Dean/University
Librarian and will normally occur only after an informal investigation establishes reasonable grounds for a formal
procedure. There is an expectation that the Sessional Member will be made aware during the informal stage of an
investigation of the concerns regarding her/his teaching performance and will be given an opportunity to give reasons why
a formal procedure should not be initiated. The Union shall be notified at the same time as the
Member.
4.40.2 If, after an informal investigation, the
Chair/Director of the Department/School and the Dean/University Librarian are of the view that a formal procedure is
warranted, an investigation shall be conducted by the
Departmental/School or a specially formed committee that reports back to the Council.
The Union shall be advised that this procedure will be invoked.
Department/Schools shall have reasonable flexibility in the constitution of such a committee. In all cases the investigating
body must have at least four (4) Members who shall attend all meetings convened. Membership shall include the
Chair/Director of the
Department/School, at least one (1) other full- time Member of the Department/School, at least one (1) Sessional Member
from the
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 47

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Department/School (if there is one willing to serve), and a nominee of the Sessional
Member under investigation (such nominee must be a full-time or Sessional Member teaching in the Department/School
during the current academic year).
4.40.3 The Member under investigation shall have the right to a full and reasonable statement of the
Department's/School’s reasons for initiating the investigation. The Member shall have the right to examine all evidence
under consideration at least ten (10) working days before any final determination is made and make
counter-representation on it in writing or in person or both. The Member shall have the right to be accompanied by a
colleague.
4.40.4 The investigating committee shall present its findings to the Department/School Council stating the reasons for its
conclusions in reasonable detail. The decision of the
Council, which may differ from that of the
Committee, shall be forwarded to the
Dean/University Librarian for action.
4.40.5 The Council's determination may request that the Member be cautioned or that the
Employer's seniority obligation to the
Sessional Member be revoked or that the
Member be placed on probation for the duration of one (1) course and that a further determination be made at the
conclusion of that course.
4.40.6 The Dean/University Librarian may accept the recommendation, reject it, or refer it back to the Department/School
for further consideration.
4.40.7 If the Dean/University Librarian decides on revocation of seniority rights, she/he shall advise the Member and the
Union in writing, stating reasons. The Member shall have the right to request an appeal within ten (10) working days of the
receipt of that communication. The appeal shall be heard by a special FPC/FFPC, which shall consist of the regular
FPC/FFPC, augmented by one (1)
Sessional Member nominated by the Union who will not vote. The Sessional Member shall have the right to be heard, to
be accompanied by a colleague, to examine any evidence with at least ten (10) days’ notice and to present
counter-representation on it.
The appeal body shall determine the case by
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 48

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 simple majority. No further arbitration or appeal shall be open to the Member or the
Employer.
4.40.8 Where an appeal is determined in favour of a
Sessional Member, and where the course has been, or comes to be, scheduled for the following academic year, the
Sessional
Member, subject to seniority, shall be assigned to, and paid for such a course or courses. Any other Sessional Member
assigned in anticipation of a determination against a Sessional Member against whom withdrawal of seniority is
anticipated shall be entitled to compensation.
4.40.9 Withdrawal of Seniority actions must first be initiated (as per Article 4.40.1 above) by June
1 in order to be effective for the subsequent academic year.
ARTICLE 4.45 – PHYSICAL AND MENTAL ILLNESS
FOR SESSIONAL MEMBERS
4.45.1 In the event of illness, a Sessional Lecturer on and off campus shall be granted leave with full pay up to two (2)
weeks in each term. If requested, the Sessional Lecturer on and off campus shall provide a medical certificate to
substantiate the claim. For longer illnesses no deduction of pay shall be made in cases where no substitute teaching costs
accrue to the Employer. Individuals who conduct instruction through distance education delivery modes would endeavor
to adjust the deadline dates for assignments and tests.
ARTICLE 4.50 – FAMILY RESPONSIBILITY FOR
SESSIONAL MEMBERS
4.50.1 The Ontario Employment Standards Act, 2000 provides specific rights and responsibilities with respect to leaves
related to family responsibilities. These provisions will apply to
Sessional Members.
ARTICLE 4.55 – RATES OF PAY FOR SESSIONAL
LECTURERS ON AND OFF CAMPUS
4.55.1 Sessional Lecturers shall be paid as follows for each three (3) credit course which commences after the date
shown below; other courses will be pro-rated as per their credit weighting. Human Kinetics activity courses will be
weighted at 2.25 credits.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 49

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
(a) Sessional Lecturers without
Establishment
Base Four Four Total pay percent percent rate of
(4%) in lieu (4%) in lieu pay of vacation of benefits
July 1, $6,717 $269 $269 $7,255
2017
(b) Sessional Lecturers with Establishment and Retirees
Base Four Four Total pay percent percent rate of
(4%) in lieu (4%) in lieu pay of vacation of benefits
July 1, $7,054 $282 $282 $7,618
2017
(c)Sessional Lecturers without Seniority
Base Four Four Total pay percent percent rate of
(4%) in lieu (4%) in lieu pay of vacation of benefits
July 1, $6,825 $273 $273 $7,371
2018
July 1, $6,941 $273 $273 $7,497
2019
(d)Sessional Lecturers with Seniority and
Retirees
Base Four Four Total pay percent percent rate of
(4%) in lieu (4%) in lieu pay of vacation of benefits
July 1, $7,166 $287 $287 $7,740
2018
July 1, $7,288 $292 $292 $7,872
2019
Sessional Lecturers are also entitled to the assignment of teaching assistants and/or markers at a level consistent with
assignment of such assistance to full-time Members.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 50

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
4.55.2 When scheduled Continuing Education
Courses may otherwise have to be cancelled,
Members may, if they choose, agree to teach a course for an amount less than the overload stipend. This amount shall be
equal to at least the stipend for the course divided by twelve (12) and multiplied by the number of students enrolled in the
course at the time the course starts. A copy of the agreement shall be sent to the Union at the same time as it is offered to
the Member.
4.55.3 The Parties agree that Sessional Lecturers who have establishment for one (1) course, according to Article 4.15 –
Appointment and
Renewal for Sessional Members, shall be paid at the establishment rate for any other course they may teach. However,
such pay does not confer establishment for that particular course.
4.55.4 The Parties agree that compensation for
Sessional Lecturers teaching a “teachable” course in the School of Education or a
"didactique" course at l’École des sciences de l’éducation shall be pro-rated for 2017-18 at six hundred and fifty eight
dollars ($658) per student; for 2018-19 at six hundred and sixty nine dollars ($669); for 2019-20 at six hundred and eighty
dollars ($680) up to the maximum of the rate of pay for a Sessional
Member with establishment for such a course.
4.55.5 The Parties agree that the rates of pay for
Sessional Lecturers teaching activity courses in the School of Human Kinetics shall be weighted at 2.25 credits as
following:
(a) Sessional Lecturers without
Establishment teaching activity courses in the School of Human
Kinetics
Base pay Four Four Total percent percent rate of
(4%) in (4%) in pay lieu of lieu of vacation benefits
July 1, $5,038 $202 $202 $5,442
2017
(b) Retirees; or Sessional Lecturers with
Establishment teaching activity courses in the School of Human
Kinetics
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 51

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Base pay Four Four Total rate percent percent of pay
(4%) in (4%) in lieu of lieu of vacation benefits
July 1, $5,290 $212 $212 $5,714
2017
(c) Sessional Lecturers without Seniority teaching activity courses in the School of Human Kinetics
Base pay Four Four Total rate percent percent of pay
(4%) in (4%) in lieu of lieu of vacation benefits
July 1, $5,119 $205 $205 $5,529
2018
July 1, $5,206 $208 $208 $5,622
2019
(d) Retirees; or Sessional Lecturers with
Seniority teaching activity courses in the School of Human Kinetics
Base pay Four Four Total rate percent percent of pay
(4%) in (4%) in lieu of lieu of vacation benefits
July 1, $5,375 $215 $215 $5,805
2018
July 1, $5,466 $219 $219 $5,904
2019
4.55.6 The Parties agree that the rates of pay for
Sessional Lecturers teaching Applied Music courses and Clinical Sessionals shall be the following:
(a) Sessional Lecturers without
Establishment teaching Applied Music courses and Clinical Sessionals
Hourly Four Four Total base rate percent percent hourly
(4%) in (4%) in rate of lieu of lieu of pay vacation benefits
July 1, $66.04 $2.64 $2.64 $71.32
2017
(b) Sessional Lecturers teaching Applied
Music courses and Clinical Sessionals
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 52

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 with Establishment
Hourly Four Four Total base rate percent percent hourly
(4%) in (4%) in rate of lieu of lieu of pay vacation benefits
July 1, $69.63 $2.79 $2.79 $75.21
2017
(c) Sessional Lecturers teaching Applied
Music courses and Clinical Sessionals without Seniority
Hourly Four Four Total base rate percent percent hourly
(4%) in (4%) in rate of lieu of lieu of pay vacation benefits
July 1, $67.09 $2.68 $2.68 $72.45
2018
July 1, $68.23 $2.73 $2.73 $73.69
2019
(d) Retirees; or Sessional Lecturers teaching Applied Music courses and
Clinical Sessionals with Seniority
Hourly Four Four Total base rate percent percent hourly
(4%) in (4%) in rate of lieu of lieu of pay vacation benefits
July 1, $70.74 $2.83 $2.83 $76.40
2018
July 1, $71.95 $2.88 $2.88 $77.71
2019
(e) The above rates shall apply to
Sessional Lecturers assigned the duties of sitting on music juries, supervising master classes, and directing ensembles.
Remuneration for Ensemble Directors:
For large ensembles of Laurentian University
(Laurentian University Choir and Laurentian
University Symphonic Wind Ensemble), the total pay will be calculated at three (3) hours per week for twenty-four (24)
weeks based on the above hourly rates.
For all other ensembles, the total pay will be calculated at two (2) hours per week for
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 53

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 twenty-four (24) weeks based on the above hourly rates.
ARTICLE 4.56 RATES OF PAY FOR INDIVIDUALS
WHO CONDUCT INSTRUCTION THROUGH DISTANCE
EDUCATION DELIVERY MODES
Base Rate
1-5 students 6 credit course 3 credit course
2017-2018 $1,648 $824
2018-19 $1,675 $838
2019-20 $1,703 $852
For each additional student >5
6 credits 6 credits 3 credits 3 credits with without with without establishment establishmen establish establish t ment ment
July $264 $268 $132 $134
1,
2017
For each additional student >5
6 credits 6 credits 3 credits 3 credits with without with without Seniority
Seniority Seniority Seniority
July 1, 268 $272 $134 $136
2018
July 1, $274 $278 $137 $139
2019
Courses with other credit values will be compensated on a pro-rated basis.
If on the Ministry reporting date enrolment has declined, the compensation will be reduced to reflect that decline going
forward, but there will be no retroactive reduction in compensation. When a Sessional Member develops a distance
education course, the
Member shall be paid at twice the overload stipend of the credit value of the course created as per Article 8.40.2.
ARTICLE 4.60 – PHYSICAL EDUCATION FACILITIES
FOR SESSIONAL MEMBERS
4.60.1 Sessional Members and their spouse and dependants as defined for full-time Members are eligible for Physical
Education Centre
(Sudbury Campus) membership and locker for
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 54

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 the academic year in which they are employed, subject to the payment of the annual
service fee and locker rental fee as established by the Division of Physical
Education.
4.60.2 Sessional Members teaching at the Barrie campus will be reimbursed by the University up to two hundred and fifty
dollars ($250) for an individual gym membership, or five hundred dollars ($500) for a family gym membership, upon
production of receipts.
ARTICLE 4.65 – EXEMPTION FROM TUITION FEES
FOR SESSIONAL MEMBERS
4.65.1 Sessional Members shall be entitled to exemption from tuition fees for credit courses taken at Laurentian
University. The exemption available shall equal the number of credits taught by the Sessional Member. The earned
exemption can be carried for a maximum of five (5) years from the time the course was taught. Sessional Members may
transfer to their spouse or dependents up to six (6) credits of the current year’s exemption credits to be used within that
academic year.
Sessional Members who teach and accrue tuition exemption will be awarded credits based on the credits taught and the
credits will not be treated differently for graduate ‘course based’ programs or undergraduate programs, i.e. 1 credit = 1
credit regardless of the level of the course.
For the purpose of calculating tuition exemption for ‘research based’ graduate programs it is understood that 3 credits will
be equivalent of 33% of a full load tuition for one term.
ARTICLE 4.70 – PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
EXPENDITURES FOR SESSIONAL MEMBERS
4.70.1 In order to further the objectives of the
University, and the creation and dissemination of knowledge, the activities of each Sessional
Member shall be supported by professional
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 55

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 expenditures. Each Sessional Member shall receive effective July 1, 2017 to June 30,
202 the amount of one hundred fifty dollars ($150) for professional development expenditures (in accordance with Article
6.45 – Professional
Development Expenditures) for each three (3) credit course taught. Courses with different credit value will be pro-rated.
Any unused portion of the maximum allowed for professional development expenditures can be carried forward for two (2)
years.
ARTICLE 4.85 CLINICAL SESSIONALS – NURSING
Clinical Instructors and Educators shall be defined as individuals who are assigned principal responsibility for the teaching
and direct supervision of up to six (6) nursing students in a clinical setting. The incumbent must hold a current College of
Nurses of Ontario license.
Clinical Advisors shall be defined as individuals who are assigned teaching and direct and indirect supervision of up to ten
(10) nursing students in a community setting.
The incumbent must hold a current College of Nurses of
Ontario license.
4.85.1 Clinical Sessionals shall have all the rights of
Sessional Members. Members who have been offered a session in accordance with the sessional Article will be given the
right to take a group up to the maximum identified in Article
4.90.
4.85.2 Rates of Pay for Clinical Sessionals
The parties agree that the rate of pay for Clinical
Sessionals shall be in accordance with Article 4.55.6.
ARTICLE 4.90 – CONTACT HOURS
Remuneration for Clinical Instructors and Educators shall be calculated as the contact hours specified in the course
description approved by Senate. The contact hours shall apply to a group of students. The group maximum is 6 students.
The workload of Clinical Advisors shall be 2.75 hours per student for each clinical session. Clinical Advisors shall
supervise no more than 10 students per clinical session.
The current practice of determining sessions shall apply.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 56

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
For the purposes of salary calculation, the following exceptions to the Senate contract hours will apply: SCIN
1004 and SCIN 2024 will be delivered as 55 contact hours, NURS 1004 and 2006 will be delivered as 13 contact hours.
ACADEMIC CAREER
ARTICLE 5.10 – ACADEMIC QUALIFICATIONS
GUIDELINES
5.10.1 For the purpose of this Collective Agreement the following definitions shall apply:
(a) "Doctoral degree" shall mean an earned Ph.D. or other degree formally recognised as equivalent to an earned
Ph.D.
(b) "Relevant experience" shall mean any combination of teaching and scholarly activity as defined in Article 5.15 –
Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of
Academics and/or equivalent professional experience.
(c) "Professional designation" shall mean a diploma earned as a result of additional experience/training and qualifying
examinations such as, but not limited to C.A., R.I.A., C.G.A., and
C.R.E.D.I.F., or others agreed to by the
Parties.
(d) When considering librarians and archivists, professional service or, where appropriate, library or archival coordination
shall be substituted for
"teaching".
In interpreting these guidelines, the following shall apply:
(a) Article 5.10 – Academic Qualifications
Guidelines
(b) Article 5.15 – Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of Academics
(c) Article 5.50 – Assessment of a
Member's Performance
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 57

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
(d) For those persons appointed prior to
July 1, 2002, Article 2.20 of the 1999-
2002 Collective Agreement shall apply.
5.10.2 Academic Qualifications Guidelines for
Appointment or Promotion of Members of the
Teaching Faculty.
(a) For the rank of Lecturer
(i) A Master's degree or equivalent degree; or
(ii) A Baccalaureate degree and an appropriate professional designation.
(b) For the rank of Assistant Professor
(i) A Doctoral degree; or
(ii) A Master's degree or equivalent and satisfactory performance of the Member's responsibilities and duties over a five
(5) year period as per Article 8.20 –
Procedures For the
Award/Denial of a Progress-
Through-The-Ranks Increment and demonstrated evidence of scholarly activity as per Article
5.15 – Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of Academics; or
(iii) In the Department of Law and
Justice, eight (8) years of full- time university education (or the equivalent) during which time the Member must have
obtained a LL.B. and an appropriate Master’s degree.
(c) For the rank of Associate Professor
(i) A Doctoral degree; and
(ii) Teaching, the quality of which is satisfactory as determined solely by the method of teaching evaluation mandated by
the Collective Agreement; and
(iii) Evidence of scholarly activity
(as per Article 5.15 – Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 58

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Academics) that is of good quality; and
(iv) At the time the promotion to
Associate becomes effective, at least five (5) years of full-time teaching and/or research in a university or an institution of
equivalent level or at least five
(5) years of professional experience judged to be relevant for teaching at the university level.
(v) The requirement for scholarly activity as stipulated under (iii) may be replaced in exceptional cases by a consistently
demonstrated quality of teaching and tutorial activity that clearly indicates outstanding qualities as a teacher as
established by whatever is the generally accepted method of evaluation.
(d) For the rank of Full Professor
(i) A Doctoral degree; and
(ii) Teaching, the quality of which is satisfactory as determined solely by the method of teaching evaluation mandated by
the Collective Agreement; and
(iii) Shown evidence of scholarly activity (per Article 5.15 –
Rights, Responsibilities and
Duties of Academics) throughout the Member’s career and after her/his promotion to
Associate Professor that ranks as a recognised contribution to the scholarly field or professional activity concerned. This
work must be judged by four (4) external referees, who shall normally be
Full Professors in an academic institution, and at least two (2) of these referees may be nominated by the applicant; and
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 59

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
(iv) Normally, at the time that the promotion to Full Professor becomes effective, at least ten
(10) years of full-time teaching and/or research in a university or in an institution of equivalent level, or has accumulated at
least ten (10) years of professional experience judged to be relevant for teaching at the University level;
Alternative to the requirements for promotion to Full Professor:
The requirement for scholarly activity stipulated under (iii) may be replaced in extraordinary circumstances by a
requirement that the Member has consistently shown clearly outstanding qualities as a teacher and has scholarly activity
of good quality.
5.10.3 Academic Qualifications Guidelines for
Appointment or Promotion of Professional
Librarians and Archivists.
(a) For the rank of General Librarian or
General Archivist
(i) A Master's degree, in Library or
Archival Studies.
(b) For the rank of Assistant Librarian or
Assistant Archivist
(i) A Doctoral degree, it being understood that unless this
Doctoral degree is in the field of
Library Science or Archival
Studies, it shall be accompanied by a Master's degree or equivalent qualifications in Library Science or Archival Studies;
or
(ii) A Master's degree in Library
Science or Archival Studies and professional service and library
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 60

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 or archival coordination skills relevant to academic librarianship or archival
management, the quality of which is established as clearly satisfactory by whatever is the generally accepted method of
evaluation over a period of four
(4) years; and demonstrated evidence of scholarly activity as per Article 5.15 – Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of
Academics.
(c) For the rank of Associate Librarian or
Associate Archivist
(i) An appropriate Doctoral degree, it being understood that unless this Doctoral degree is in the field of Library Science or
Archival Studies, it shall be accompanied by a Master's degree or equivalent qualifications in Library Science or Archival
Studies; or
In exceptional cases, a Master's degree in Library Science or
Archival Studies and professional service and library or archival coordination skills relevant to academic librarianship or
archival management, the quality of which is established as clearly satisfactory by whatever is the generally accepted
method of evaluation over a period of four
(4) years; and demonstrated evidence of scholarly activity as per Article 5.15 – Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of
Academics since last promotion; and
(ii) At the time the promotion to
Associate becomes effective, at least five (5) years of full-time professional service relevant to academic librarianship or
archival management.
(d) For the rank of Full Librarian or Full
Archivist
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 61

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
(i) An appropriate Doctoral degree, it being understood that unless this Doctoral degree is in the field of Library Science or
Archival Studies, it shall be accompanied by a Master's degree or equivalent qualifications in Library Science or Archival
Studies; or
In exceptional cases, a Master's degree in Library Science or
Archival Studies and professional service and library or archival coordination skills relevant to academic librarianship or
archival management, the quality of which is established as clearly satisfactory by whatever is the generally accepted
method of evaluation over a period of four
(4) years; and demonstrated evidence of scholarly activity as per Article 5.15 – Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of
Academics since last promotion; and
(ii) Have demonstrated outstanding professional performance and, in addition, have shown evidence of on-going scholarly
activity of good quality (as per
Article 5.15 – Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of
Academics) throughout the
Member’s career and after her/his promotion to Associate
Librarian or Associate
Archivist. This work must be judged by four (4) external referees, two (2) of whom may be nominated by the applicant;
and
(iii) Have normally accumulated, at the time the promotion to Full
Librarian or Full Archivist becomes effective, at least ten
(10) years of full-time
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 62

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 professional service relevant to academic librarianship or archival management.
5.10.4 Bilingualism
(a) The Employer may, in consultation with the Departments/Schools:
(i) Stipulate in advertising for and in appointing Members, that a bilingual applicant is preferred or required;
(ii) Require the appointment of applicants capable of working in either or both of the official languages in order to improve
the balance between courses offered in English and courses offered in French within any
Department/School or Faculty;
(iii) Require the appointment of applicants capable of working in either or both of the official languages in the Library;
(iv) Consider bilingualism as a desired qualification for those
Members who are selected to take on specific responsibilities.
(c) Letters of appointment shall clearly indicate any bilingual requirements which are to be a condition of being granted
tenure and any assistance that the Employer might agree to provide to the Members for them to meet these requirements.
(d) A Member's performance in both
French and English will be taken into consideration in such matters as promotion and tenure.
5.10.5 A Member who has consistently demonstrated clearly outstanding performance in the areas of
teaching/professional librarianship and/or archival management, research, and/or university governance and
administrative duties may, in extraordinary circumstances, be promoted to the next rank without fulfilling the years of
experience criterion as stipulated
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 63

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 in paragraphs 5.10.2 (b), (c) and (d) and paragraphs 5.10.3 (b), (c) and (d) above. The
burden of proof of outstanding performance rests with the applicant.
ARTICLE 5.15 – RIGHTS, RESPONSIBILITIES AND
DUTIES OF ACADEMICS
5.15.1 The full-time Members of the Bargaining Unit have rights, duties and responsibilities which derive from their
positions as teachers/professional librarians and scholars working within the University community, and which reflect the
reasonable expectations of the Members, the University community and the contractual expectations of the Employer.
In this Article, the term Members refers to full- time Members unless otherwise specified.
5.15.2 Members have the right to engage in the following activities:
Priority One:
A) Teaching / Professional
Librarianship / Archives
Management
B) Scholarly Activity
Priority Two:
C) University Governance and
Administrative Duties
Priority Three:
D) Outside Professional Activities
E) Service to the Community
Priority Four:
F) Other Paid Activity (consistent with
Article 5.15.38)
5.15.3 Members have responsibilities relating to items A), B) and C) and are expected to participate actively in items A),
B) and C), although not necessarily in all three (3) in any one (1) given year. A Member's responsibilities related to item A)
shall consist of those teaching or library duties which are assigned by the Dean/University Librarian as per Article 5.40 –
Academic Workload. A
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 64

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Member's responsibilities related to items B) and C) are inherent in a Member's status as an academic and thus flow
naturally therefrom. Certain specific duties related to item B) and C) may also be assigned by the
Dean/University Librarian on an ad hoc basis in order to ensure a good and proper functioning of the University. A
Member's responsibilities relating to item D), E) and F) are undertaken voluntarily by the Member.
5.15.4 Some specific features of academic responsibilities are set out in the following sections:
Priority One:
A) Part One - Teaching
5.15.5 Members have an obligation to develop and maintain their scholarly competence and effectiveness as teachers
within the area of their expertise. They shall inform their students regarding their methods of evaluation, which have been
approved by the
Department/School and the Dean, consistent with Senate policies. They shall also inform their students regarding their
instructional methods and seek approval of the
Department/School and of the Dean for substantial changes in instructional methods involving significant increases in
costs or alterations in the established policy of the
Department/School, e.g. conversion of a lecture course to a reading course.
5.15.6 While it is recognized that whenever possible there shall be adequate consultation with the
Member and the Department/School as to the assignment of teaching duties, once such teaching duties have been
assigned in a fair and equitable manner by the Dean, it is the responsibility of the Member to teach the assigned courses
to students registered in them at the time and place designated by the
Dean in a manner which reflects the area of the content of the course approved by the
Department/School consistent with the
University calendar. A Member shall not delegate her/his teaching duties to another person, the occasional guest lecturer
excepted. Assignment of teaching duties shall be consistent with Article 5.40 – Academic
Workload. Teaching responsibilities include being available for reasonable consultation with students at their teaching
locale subject to Article 5.40 – Academic Workload.
Members have an obligation to be available to
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 65

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 students for consultation during a regular teaching term for at least one (1) hour per
week for a three-credit course. The office hours, or alternate contact hours, shall be included in the course syllabus. The
Department/School will post the office hours.
5.15.7 A Member shall not be required to co-teach a course without the Member’s consent.
5.15.8 Members shall comply with all properly established regulations of the University, which are not at variance with this
Collective
Agreement. Members shall accept responsibility for participation in the effective operation of the University, including
responsibilities for academic counselling, accreditation, registration, and the supervision of examinations as appropriately
assigned by the Department/School, the Dean or the
Registrar's office consistent with Senate policy. During examinations, only the head invigilator shall be a faculty Member.
The head invigilator shall be selected randomly from the LUFA full-time faculty membership and the names of those who
serve shall be removed from the pool of potential head invigilators until all remaining Members have served. The names
of those Members not scheduling any of their final examinations through the Registrar’s Office will not be included in the
pool for the examination period concerned.
5.15.9 It is the responsibility of Members to act ethically, fairly, and in a non-discriminatory manner in their dealings with
students and their academic colleagues. It is also the responsibility of Members to foster a free exchange of ideas
including a discussion of differing views, to avoid discrimination, to respect the principles of confidentiality in a manner
consistent with the performance of their academic role, and to acknowledge their indebtedness to students and their
academic colleagues in relation to their own teaching.
5.15.10 Each Member shall have freedom of discussion. However, in the exercise of this freedom in the classroom,
reasonable restraint shall be used in introducing matters unrelated to her/his subject or discipline.
5.15.11 Members shall be free to organise and to structure classroom and laboratory activities and to adopt reasonable
means to maintain a learning environment, which is both productive and orderly. They shall have the right to rule
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 66

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 on the use by students of electronic devices such as recording devices, calculating
devices, and lap-top computers in the classroom, laboratory or learning situation.
The duty to accommodate students with disabilities is a shared responsibility of the parties. Accordingly, where students
require accessibility services, any accommodation proposed by Accessibility Services shall be developed with the
participation of the faculty member without compromising student confidentiality. In Accessibility Services developing
accommodation, the pedagogical mission and goals of the course, including any professional standards shall be
considered.
Members shall be informed of any such authorizations and, if necessary, can consult with Accessibility Services for
possible alterations.
Notwithstanding Members’ right to rule, students designated by Accessibility Services shall have access to electronic
devices as determined by Accessibility Services.
Where a Member doesn’t allow electronic devices in the classroom, Accessibility
Services will work with the Member and students to find suitable alternatives. In exceptional cases where no alternatives
are possible (for reasons other than financial reasons), the parties agree to accommodate in a way that protects the
Member’s intellectual property. No Member shall be required to disclose personal notes or course material that is
proprietary.
5.15.12 Members shall not alter the schedule or cancel instruction time except with prior permission of the Dean in any
but exceptional circumstances. Such permission shall not be unreasonably refused. Both Parties agree that every
reasonable effort will be made to notify the students affected. Timetable changes of a permanent nature require the prior
permission of the Dean. Absences are governed by Article 7.20 – Absence - General.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 67

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
5.15.13 Members shall have fourteen (14) calendar days following the final exam to submit their final grades or fourteen
(14) calendar days following the deadline for submission of the final item of work as indicated in the course syllabus.
Requests for extensions shall not be unreasonably refused. For distance courses,
Members shall have fourteen (14) calendar days from the date of the receipt of their final exam or final assignment.
To the extent possible, the Registrar will schedule final exams for courses with large enrolments at the beginning of the
exam period.
5.15.14 The Member teaching a course is responsible for evaluating student course work (including such evaluation as
has been assigned to teaching assistants) and for determining and assigning the grades received by the students in that
course. A grade assigned by a Member shall not be altered except in compliance with
Senate policy.
A) Part Two - Professional
Librarianship / Archives
Management
5.15.15 Members have an obligation to develop and to maintain their scholarly competence and effectiveness as
librarians within the area of their expertise.
5.15.16 While it is recognised that whenever possible there shall be adequate consultation between the Member and the
University Librarian as to the assignment of duties, once such duties have been assigned in a fair and equitable manner
by the University Librarian, it is the responsibility of the Members to perform their duties at the time and place designated
by the
University Librarian. Assignment of professional library / archives management duties shall be consistent with Article 5.40
–
Academic Workload.
5.15.17 It is the responsibility of Members to deal ethically, fairly, and in a non-discriminatory manner in their dealings with
students and colleagues. It is also the responsibility of
Members to foster a free exchange of ideas, to avoid discrimination, to respect the principles of confidentiality in a manner
consistent with the performance of their academic role, and to acknowledge their indebtedness to their academic
colleagues in relation to their own professional activities.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 68

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
5.15.18 Members shall have the right and responsibility to adopt reasonable means to maintain an orderly and productive
learning environment in the library / archives.
5.15.19 Members, if involved in scheduled work related activities, shall not alter or cancel such scheduled activities except
with prior permission of the University Librarian in any but exceptional circumstances. Such permission shall not be
unreasonably refused. Both Parties agree that every reasonable effort will be made to notify the person affected.
Absences are governed by
Article 7.20 – Absence - General.
B) Scholarly Activity
5.15.20 Members shall have the right and responsibility to devote a reasonable proportion of their time to scholarly
activity.
5.15.21 It is understood that for the purposes of this
Collective Agreement the term "scholarly activity" means:
(a) Research directed towards a contribution to knowledge, and the dissemination of its results; and/or
(b) Participation in those academic activities that contribute to the enhancement, creation and dissemination of
knowledge; and/or
(c) Creative and professional activities which contribute to one's discipline.
5.15.22 Scholarly activity may involve, although not necessarily be limited to, activities of the type set out in the following
list. It is understood that this list does not imply an order of priority.
It is also understood that the following forms of scholarly activity are not necessarily to be given equal weight and
application for each discipline when a Member is being evaluated for an annual increment, merit increment, tenure or
promotion. In each case the Member must demonstrate that the activity is of good quality and is consistent with the
contribution to knowledge described in Article 5.15.20 above.
(a) The writing or editing and publication of books, textbooks, journals and of Articles, which may be externally reviewed.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 69

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
(b) The earning of additional appropriate academic and/or professional qualifications.
(c) Research carried out on research contracts.
(d) The writing and/or publication of case studies.
(e) The development of teaching/library materials, of an innovative sort which have a wider application than the Member's
own teaching/library activities.
(f) The compilation and publication of scholarly bibliographies, or literary work.
(g) The translation and publication of scholarly or literary work.
(h) Literary and artistic works, including recordings and public performances.
(i) Demonstrated leadership in the area of professional education, including workshops.
(j) Creative application of existing knowledge through such activities as consulting or workshops.
(k) Research carried out using traditional/Indigenous knowledge and the practical applications or dissemination of such
research generally, or specifically through engagement with Indigenous communities.
(l) Development and publication of new teaching strategies.
(m) Attending and/or presenting at conferences.
(n) Production of images including but not limited to photography and architectural works.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 70

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
5.15.23 The Parties agree that scholarly activity does not normally include research directly related to the immediate and
normal preparation for teaching activity.
5.15.24 Where appropriate in their published work, the
Members shall indicate affiliation with the
University and acknowledge their indebtedness to students and their academic colleagues in relation to their own
research.
5.15.25 The Parties encourage all Members of the
Bargaining Unit to deposit one (1) signed copy of their published monographs or reports in the University Library. The
University agrees to pay for reasonable expenses incurred by a
Member in making such material available to the Library. Members are also encouraged to submit their scholarly work to
the University’s online repository.
5.15.26 Members have the right to participate in the activities of professional or learned societies and the like, providing
such activities do not conflict with the reasonable fulfilment of assigned duties.
Priority Two:
C) University Governance and
Administrative Duties
5.15.27 To the extent consistent with their teaching/library and scholarly responsibilities,
Members shall contribute to the governance of the University through membership on appropriate bodies. It is understood
that for the purposes of this Article, service to the
Union will be considered equivalent to service on Department/School or Senate Committees.
5.15.28 While exercising university governance and administrative responsibilities, Members shall deal ethically with other
university employees and students so that objectivity, fairness, and absence of discrimination are maintained in all
deliberations including assessment of performance of any employee or student. Members shall not infringe on the
academic freedom of academic colleagues or students or breach confidentiality in this regard.
5.15.29 In order to ensure equality of opportunity to participate in university governance, the
Employer agrees to circulate notice of
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 71

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 openings on all university bodies above the
Department / School / Library level to eligible
Members at least two (2) weeks prior to the time that the vacancies must be filled.
5.15.30 The University’s mandate as a bilingual institution of higher learning in accordance with the Laurentian University
of Sudbury Act entails that the following activities shall also constitute academic work under University
Governance and Administrative Duties:
(a) Formal language training in either of the official languages, French or
English, as provided in Article 3.30 –
Bilingualism, as may be required to achieve tenure, or formal training in an
Indigenous language and;
(b) The provision of such linguistic services that include, but are not limited to, translation, interpretation, representation
and communication, which contribute to university governance and administrative duties.
Priority Three:
D) Outside Professional Activities
5.15.31 The Parties encourage Members to participate in outside professional activities.
5.15.32 The scope and nature of any professional activities of a substantial nature, whether paid or unpaid shall be
reported in writing to the
Dean/University Librarian as part of the annual report of Members. Notwithstanding the above, contractual activities that
would involve Members spending a total of more than one half (1/2) day a week on a regular basis between Monday and
Friday during a term in which they teach or perform professional library duties shall be reported in writing to the
Dean/University Librarian prior to the signing of the contract or beginning of the work. The Dean/University Librarian may
require the Members not to undertake an activity or to moderate such an activity on the grounds that the time involved
would or does interfere with the Member's academic obligations as defined in this Collective
Agreement. A reasonable period of time shall be allowed for the Members to comply. The appropriateness of the
decisions of the
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 72

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Dean/University Librarian on these matters is subject to grievance and arbitration.
5.15.33 When undertaking outside professional activities, Members retain the rights and responsibilities associated with
academic freedom.
5.15.34 When a Member's outside professional activities involve the use of the University's facilities, supplies or services,
permission for their use shall be approved in writing or through email by the appropriate University
Administrator. Such permission shall not be unreasonably refused. These services shall normally be paid for at the
prevailing internal
University user rate, unless the University
Administrator agrees in writing to waive all or part of the fee(s).
E) Service to the Community
5.15.35 The Parties encourage Members to offer service to the community.
5.15.36 The rights and responsibilities of Members who offer service to the community shall be the same as for those
Members who participate in outside professional activities, as modified by Article 5.15.37 below.
5.15.37 When a Member's service to the community involves the use of the University's facilities, supplies or services,
permission for their use shall be approved in writing or through email by the appropriate University
Administrator. Such permission shall not be unreasonably refused. These services shall normally be paid for at the
prevailing external
University user rate, unless the University
Administrator agrees in writing to waive all or part of the fee(s).
Priority Four:
F) Other Paid Activity
5.15.38 Faculty Members have the right to engage in other paid activity
5.15.39 All such activities shall be governed by Article
5.15.31 above, except the annual report where such reporting shall be optional to the
Member.
ARTICLE 5.20 – APPOINTMENT AND RENEWAL
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 73

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Appointment of Full-time Members of the Bargaining
Unit
5.20.1 New appointments that fall within the
Bargaining Unit shall normally be advertised:
(a) Within the University and
(b) Outside the University
In suitable national and discipline publications such as University Affairs, CAUT Bulletin and other publications that may
be especially directed to professionals who belong to any of the four (4) designated employment equity groups.
Advertisements shall contain an article stating that Laurentian University is committed to employment equity.
When the Dean/University Librarian indicates that there is a vacancy to be filled, the
Dean/University Librarian shall seek a recommendation from the Department/School on academic needs, qualifications,
and criteria for the external posting. These recommendations shall not be unreasonably refused.
5.20.2 (a) Appointments shall be made by the
Vice-President, Academic and Provost on behalf of the Employer and on the recommendation of the
Dean/University Librarian and the written recommendation of the majority of the Members of the
Department/School concerned after scheduled, minuted meeting(s) with
Department/School Members.
Individual Members (including those on leave) may choose to vote in person, by email or by facsimile. Proxy voting is not
permitted.
(b) The letter of appointment shall indicate the Department/School to which the
Member will be assigned.
(c) In the event that an appointee has duties and responsibilities in more than one Department/School or program, then
one Department/School shall be declared to be the Member's
Department/School. Wherever in this
Collective Agreement recommendations or evaluations of a
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 74

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Member's performance are required from a Department/School, in addition to the recommendation or evaluation from the
assigned Department/School, the other Department(s)/School(s) or program(s) shall also submit their recommendation or
evaluation; these recommendations shall carry a weight approximately proportional to the duties and responsibilities of the
Member in each program/Department/School.
(d) Advertisements for all vacant positions shall refer to the Union website where applicants can access the Collective
Agreement.
5.20.3 If a number of applicants have been judged to be substantially equal in qualifications and appropriateness of
academic specialization, priority shall be given to Canadian citizens, permanent residents, and persons on minister's
permits.
5.20.4 (a) Where selection has to take place among equally qualified applicants, relevant criteria for appointment shall
include teaching/professional, scholarly potential and employment equity goals.
(b) In disciplines where it is difficult to attract qualified faculty, and/or in order to achieve employment equity goals, the
Employer and the Union will work together to devise and implement innovative appointment arrangements in order to
combine appointments with the opportunity to complete Doctoral degrees.
(c) All tenured, tenure-track Members and
Master Lecturers of the
Department/School shall have the right to participate in all aspects of the appointment process. The
Chair/Director of the
Department/School shall issue a notice to all eligible Members of the
Department/School requesting that they indicate their intent to serve on the Department/School Search
Committee. Members shall indicate their intention to participate in the process within five (5) working days.
Members who elect to participate in the
Department/School Search Committee
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 75

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 shall attend all meetings and interviews in order to be able to vote for the
recommendation of a candidate or short list of candidates to the
Department/School. The
Department/School Search Committee shall consist of at least five (5) eligible
Members, with at least one (1) female and one (1) male Member. Where this requirement cannot be fulfilled, the
Dean/University Librarian, in consultation with the
Department/School, shall appoint a suitable Member from another
Department/School to the search committee.
(d) Search committees shall be proactive in the recruitment of applicants from the four (4) employment equity groups
outlined in Article 5.25 – Employment
Equity. If the tentative short list of applicants does not include at least one (1) Member of an equity group, the search
committee shall submit an explanation. If the Dean/University
Librarian is not satisfied with the explanation, the Dean/University
Librarian may change the short list. If the short list contains fewer than three
(3) names, this change can only be an additional name. Alternatively, the
Dean/University Librarian shall work together with the Department/School to substitute one (1) of the short-listed names.
5.20.5 Appointments shall be made only to the ranks referred to in this Collective Agreement, viz,
Lecturer, Assistant Professor, Associate
Professor, Full Professor, and the corresponding library ranks (General
Librarian/Archivist, Assistant
Librarian/Archivist, Associate
Librarian/Archivist, and Full
Librarian/Archivist).
5.20.6 Appointments shall be made only to the status categories referred to in this Collective
Agreement, viz, limited term, probationary and tenured. From time to time the Parties may agree to other categories.
5.20.7 Candidates from within the Bargaining Unit shall be entitled to consideration for all advertised posts.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 76

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
5.20.8 All letters of appointment shall normally be signed no later than the start of a teaching term in which a Member
must first teach, i.e. by September 1, January 1 and May 1.
Letters of appointment shall follow the format outlined in Appendix B – Standard Letter of
Employment and Offer of Employment. No letter of appointment shall contain any conditions not consistent with this
Collective
Agreement. A copy of the letter of appointment, or revisions thereof, shall be forwarded to the Union at the same time as
the original is sent to the applicant. The applicant’s telephone/fax numbers and email address, as well as any other means
of contacting the applicant will be included if the applicant has provided them.
5.20.9 Upon appointment new Members shall provide the Vice-President, Academic and
Provost copies of their birth certificate, or equivalent document, and certified copies of their academic degrees and, if
required for the position, their professional qualifications.
5.20.10 Teaching load reduction for new Members a) The teaching load reduction applies to
Members appointed at the rank of Lecturer,
Assistant Professor and Associate Professor only, who have three (3) years or less of teaching experience. b) The
teaching load reduction shall be six (6) credits. c) The teaching load reduction applies to probationary appointments only,
in the first year. d) Notwithstanding Article(c) above, the teaching load reduction can be taken over the first two
consecutive years, at the Member’s discretion, as a teaching load reduction. In such event, the
Member may take a reduction of three (3) credits per year over the first two consecutive years. e) The teaching load
reduction does not apply to
Members who are appointed as Chairs with reduced teaching load. f) It is understood that all references to teaching in this
Article are to the University level teaching. g) The teaching load reduction cannot be converted into salary.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 77

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 h) For the purposes of calculating eligibility for a teaching load reduction, teaching
experience shall be calculated as follows: i) One year for each year of full-time teaching experience; ii) Part-time
experience shall be calculated in terms of the total number of credits taught, twelve (12) credits of part-time teaching
being equal to one year of full-time teaching experience for Members being appointed to an
Academic Unit where twelve (12) credits is the normal teaching load. iii) Part-time experience shall be calculated in terms
of the total number of credits taught, fifteen (15) credits of part-time teaching being equal to one year of full-time teaching
experience for Members being appointed to an
Academic Unit where fifteen (15) credits is the normal teaching load. iv) It is understood that teaching experience means
university level teaching.
Limited Term Appointments
5.20.11 Limited Term appointments are appointments that carry no implication of renewal or continuation beyond the
stated term and no implication that the appointee shall be considered for tenure. Limited term appointees must be
assigned to an academic
Department/School and shall be considered
Members unless excluded by Article 2.15 –
Recognition of the Bargaining Unit. Limited term appointments are utilised:
(a) To bring distinguished visitors to the
University.
(b) For exchange appointments.
(c) To provide replacements for Members on leave.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 78

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
(d) To respond to specific academic needs which the Employer, for academic and/or budgetary reasons, does not wish to
result in an appointment in the probationary stream. This shall be done in consultation with the Union who shall not
unreasonably withhold its agreement.
(e) For appointments to programs with provisional funding or of a trial nature.
5.20.12 Where appointments must be made urgently, the Vice-President, Academic and Provost may, with the agreement
of the Parties, authorise exceptions to the procedures in
Articles 5.20.1 and 5.20.4 above. Such agreement shall not be unreasonably withheld.
5.20.13 The Vice-President, Academic and Provost has the discretion, after consultation with the
Department/School and the Dean/University
Librarian, to re-appoint the holder of a term appointment without further advertisement.
Should the Employer choose to re-advertise the post, the incumbent may apply, but retains no right of preference over
other acceptable applicants. The normal procedures for appointment will apply.
5.20.14 Term appointees may not apply for promotion in the final year of their term appointment, unless they had been
prevented from applying in the year immediately preceding. A term appointee reappointed to a further term appointment
or a term appointee reappointed to a probationary position shall be reappointed to the same rank that she/he held in the
previous appointment. A Member so reappointed may, subsequent to reappointment, also apply for a promotion as per
Article 5.65 – Promotion Procedures. If the
Member is granted a promotion, the said promotion shall be retroactive to the date of the Member's reappointment.
5.20.15 Term appointments shall be limited to a total of three (3) years, except by agreement of the
Parties. In cases where the limited term appointment is a replacement for an academic administrator, the appointment
may be for a term up to five (5) years. The initial term may be for less than a full academic year, but reappointment shall
normally be for a full twelve (12) month period. The term limits
(three (3) or five (5)) shall apply whether or not the term appointments are consecutive or
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 79

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 intermittent.
5.20.16 Non-renewal of term appointments shall not be subject to grievance.
5.20.17 For the duration of this Collective Agreement, the Employer agrees that the total number of limited term
appointments will not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the total number of faculty Members except with the agreement of
the Parties.
Probationary Appointments/Tenure Appointments
5.20.18 Probationary appointments are defined as appointments lasting up to a maximum of five
(5) years, during which time the Employer and the Member are afforded an opportunity for mutual appraisal.
5.20.19 Probation does not imply that the Employer will grant tenure at the end of the probationary period; it does imply
that the Employer will give serious consideration to awarding tenure.
5.20.20 Should a Member holding a term appointment wish to apply for a probationary appointment, the Member's
application shall be considered in the normal way along with all other applications for the position. Should such a
Member be appointed to the probationary position, at the Member’s discretion, the
Member’s probationary period may be reduced by up to the number of years that the
Member has served in limited term appointment(s) to a maximum of three (3) years.
5.20.21 Faculty appointed on probation will serve a maximum probationary period based on the academic rank at which
the appointment is made. Faculty appointed at the rank of
Lecturer/General Librarian or Assistant
Professor/Librarian will serve a five (5) year probationary period. Faculty appointed at the rank of Associate
Professor/Librarian and Full
Professor/Librarian will serve a three (3) year probationary period. Where a Member is appointed at the rank of Full
Professor/Librarian the Employer may grant tenure on appointment. Under exceptional circumstances and upon
recommendation of both the Department/School and the Vice-
President, Academic and Provost, where a
Member is appointed at the rank of Associate
Professor/Librarian the University may grant tenure on appointment, provided that the new
Member is tenured at another recognised
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 80

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 university.
5.20.22 An Associate Professor/Librarian or Full
Professor/Librarian who has at least three (3) years of service to the University, who has applied for a probationary
appointment, shall be considered for such an appointment on the basis of the criteria listed in Article 5.60 –
Tenure Evaluation Procedures. Should such a Member be appointed to the position, it shall be a final probationary
appointment of one (1) year with tenure evaluation to begin by
September 30 of that year.
5.20.23 In the case of persons appointed at the rank of Lecturer/General Librarian and Assistant
Professor/Librarian, the initial probationary appointment shall be for a period of three (3) years.
(a) In their initial letter of appointment by the Vice-President, Academic and
Provost and in their annual evaluation letters by the Deans/University
Librarian, all Members on initial probationary contract shall be notified that they shall begin to undergo a renewal
evaluation by the Faculty
Personnel Committee no later than
September 30 of the final year in their initial probationary contract.
(b) Subject to satisfactory performance as outlined in Article 5.20.22 (c) below, the initial probationary appointment will be
followed by a further two (2) year probationary appointment with a tenure evaluation to take place in the final year of that
second appointment or as per Article 5.60 – Tenure Evaluation
Procedures.
(c) The decision whether or not to offer a second two (2) year probationary appointment shall be reached on the basis of a
judgement of satisfactory performance under procedures set out under Article 5.45 – Annual Report for
Members, Article 5.60 – Tenure
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 81

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Evaluation Procedures and Article 8.20
– Procedures for the Award/Denial for a Progress-Through-the-Ranks
Increment;
(d) In assessing the applicant’s progress toward meeting the requirements for tenure outlined in paragraphs 5.60.3
(d) and (e) of Article 5.60 – Tenure
Evaluation Procedures, the Faculty
Personnel Committee shall comment on each aspect of these criteria. The
Faculty Personnel Committee should also comment on the rate of progress shown during the initial probationary period. If
the performance is found unsatisfactory the Faculty Personnel
Committee may recommend that the applicant not be offered a final probationary appointment.
5.20.24 In the case of persons appointed at the rank of Associate Professor/Librarian and Full
Professor/Librarian, the initial appointment shall be a three (3) year probationary appointment with a tenure evaluation to
take place in the final year of the appointment, except as modified in Article 5.20.20 above.
5.20.25 The tenure evaluation is to be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in
Article 5.60 – Tenure Evaluation Procedures, and will result in a decision either to award tenure or to allow the
appointment to lapse.
Adjunct Appointments
5.20.26 When it is appropriate for scholarly or professional reasons, a person may be appointed to a position as Adjunct
Professor by the Vice-President, Academic and Provost upon recommendation by
Departments/Schools and Deans for a period with defined privileges and voluntary responsibilities in scholarly activity.
Each month at Senate, the Vice-President,
Academic and Provost shall table as a separate Information item a list of any newly appointed Adjunct faculty Members
including their names, Department/School affiliations, periods of appointment along with a justification for each
appointment, highest degree held, year obtained, current institution and rank (position), at that institution.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 82

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
5.20.27 All Adjunct faculty Members shall also be included in the faculty listing on
Department/School websites.
5.20.28 Adjunct appointments shall also become
Sessional Members if they carry any of the duties consistent with this Collective
Agreement. Such Members shall be paid for thesis supervision as per Article 5.40 –
Academic Workload. However, Adjunct faculty Members may collaborate in scholarly activities with Members without
becoming
Sessional Members.
Cross Appointments
5.20.29 When it is appropriate for academic teaching/scholarly or professional reasons,
Members may be appointed to more than one
(1) Department/School of the University such that the salary of the Member is charged to one (1) fiscal
Department/School, but she/he is named to another Department/School in which she/he has a sustained academic
teaching/scholarly or professional interest.
Such appointments shall be called cross appointments.
5.20.30 A cross appointment shall only be made with the consent of the Members of all
Departments/Schools concerned.
5.20.31 A cross appointment shall be made by the
Employer for a fixed period not exceeding five
(5) years, and may be renewed or altered with the consent of the Member and on the recommendations of the
Department(s)/School(s) concerned. The termination or alteration of a cross appointment, except for cause, shall not in
itself jeopardize the Member's appointment with the University in the Department/School of primary responsibility, as
specified in Article
5.20.34 below. Notwithstanding any of the foregoing, a cross appointment will terminate upon the termination of the
appointment in the
Department/School of primary responsibility as specified in Article 5.20.34 below.
5.20.32 The sources and level of administrative and
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 83

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 academic teaching/scholarly support available to the Member with a cross appointment
shall be mutually agreed by the Member and the
Department/School concerned and shall be confirmed in writing by the Chair/Director. In the event that the
cross-appointed Member is recommended by either Department/School to teach in the Department/School to which
she/he has been cross appointed, the teaching assignment will be issued by the primary Dean of the Member and only
with the agreement of the other Dean (if applicable) and after consultation with both
Chair(s)/Director(s).
5.20.33 In the case of a cross appointment, the assessment procedures and criteria to be used by the cross-appointed
Department/School in considering the
Member for renewal, tenure and promotion shall be those of the Department/School of primary responsibility as specified
in paragraphs 5.50.6 (b), 5.50.6 (c), 5.50.6 (d),
5.50.6(e), 5.50.6 (f), 5.50.6 (g) and 5.50.6 (i) only and are subject to Article 5.20.33 below.
The application dossier shall be made available to the cross-appointed
Department/School.
5.20.34 The Chair/Director and the eligible Members of the cross-appointed Departments/Schools shall be consulted
formally during the renewal, tenure and promotion process. This consultation shall not involve examination of the
academic dossier but shall be limited to a written assessment concerning the contributions the applicant has made to the
cross-appointed Department/School in the areas outlined in Article 5.15 – Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of Academics and shall be weighed by the Faculty Personnel
Committee pursuant to Article 5.50.7 (j).
Members who are eligible to vote and participate in the assessment of applications shall do so in their own
Department/School of primary responsibility. In cases where an eligible Member of the applicants cross- appointed
Department/School acts as an assessor in the applicant’s Department/School of primary responsibility pursuant to Article
5.50.7 (j), the eligible Member shall not be permitted to vote or participate in the assessment of the applicant by the
applicant’s cross-appointed Department/School given that in no case shall an eligible Member be permitted to vote and
participate in the assessment in more than one instance.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 84

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
5.20.35 The letter of cross appointment shall state the privileges and sharing, if any, of duties and responsibilities between
or among
Departments/Schools.
5.20.36 Members holding a cross appointment shall be eligible to attend meetings of all
Departments/Schools to which they are appointed, but may vote, be elected to or appointed to committees only in their
Academic Department/School of primary responsibility.
5.20.37 Qualified persons from the Northern Ontario
School of Medicine may be cross-appointed to
Departments/Schools within Laurentian
University subject to the approval of the
Department/School. Such persons shall be
Members of the Union if they carry any of the duties consistent with this Collective
Agreement. Such Members shall be paid for thesis supervision according to Article 5.40 –
Academic Workload.
Spousal Hiring Appointments
5.20.38 When an applicant has been recommended by a Department/School for a probationary or tenured appointment
and has a spouse or partner who may be qualified for an academic position, a Department/School appropriate to the
discipline of the spouse or partner may recommend a one (1) to three (3) year term appointment without advertising under
the following conditions:
(a) The Vice-President, Academic and
Provost has confirmed the availability of a position within the
Department/School in question;
(b) The Chair/Director has made available an application file for viewing by all
Members of that Department/School and has arranged interviews and open meetings with the applicant and the
Members in the Department/School, on campus or through teleconference;
(c) A majority of the full-time Members of the Department/School by vote have approved of the recommendation, including
the term of the appointment when applicable;
(d) The appointment has been approved by the Vice-President, Academic and
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 85

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Provost after review of the application file and the Department/School recommendation;
(e) The decision of the Vice-President,
Academic and Provost is not subject to grievance.
5.20.39 Notwithstanding the provisions of Article
5.20.15 above, an appointment made under the provisions may be extended, subject to
Department/School approval, for a period of up to five (5) years in total.
5.20.40 At any time, the total number of spousal appointments shall not exceed ten (10).
Appointments and Accreditations to the Faculty of
Graduate Studies
5.20.41 All Members with a PhD or equivalent qualification are eligible to teach graduate courses or conjoint
graduate-senior undergraduate courses. However, to supervise graduate theses Members must be appointed to the
Faculty of Graduate Studies.
Members may apply at any time to the
Director of Graduate Studies for appointment to the Faculty of Graduate Studies. The requirements for appointment shall
be publicly available to all Members. All applications for appointment will be evaluated in accordance with the Policy of the
Council of the Faculty of
Graduate Studies.
Appointment to the Position of Master Lecturer
5.20.42 The Parties recognise that the University is best served by tenured and tenure track faculty who contribute to the
pursuit and dissemination of knowledge. This includes appointments with responsibilities in teaching, scholarly activity,
and governance. It is not generally desirable to make other teaching intensive appointments as a substitute for these
appointments.
5.20.43 A Master Lecturer with a continuing appointment is responsible for undergraduate teaching / clinical education or
supervision / language teaching / skills teaching / coaching
/ writing assistance and other related duties as determined by the Employer. Notwithstanding the above, a Master
Lecturer may, where appropriate, elect to teach graduate courses.
A Master Lecturer may also engage in scholarly activity, and is entitled to participate
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 86

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 in university governance and vote in
Department/School Meetings.
5.20.44 Qualifications: At least a Master’s degree or appropriate professional qualifications and with proven competence
in teaching.
5.20.45 Appointments: Any new Master Lecturer position must be advertised to the roster in the
Department/School internally before being advertised externally and must go through the normal hiring process for the
appointment of full-time Members. Sessional Members on the roster shall have first consideration for appointment as
Master Lecturer. In the event there is no qualified roster applicant as determined by the Department/School, the
University may advertise externally. Nothing precludes the Employer from working with the
Boards of the three (3) federated universities to create such a position funded jointly by the partners. Appointments to the
position of
Master Lecturer shall be made by the Vice-
President, Academic and Provost upon recommendation of the Department/School and the Dean.
A newly appointed Master Lecturer shall normally have a probationary period of three
(3) years. A Member appointed to a Master
Lecturer position with at least thirty-six (36) credits taught on campus within the
Department/School may have the probationary period waived on the recommendation of the Department/School and the
Dean.
The evaluation of an applicant on probation shall follow the normal assessment process for full-time Members as set out
in Article 5.50
– Assessment of a Member’s Performance, but shall be restricted to the teaching responsibilities, and other recognized
workload and reported voluntary duties as per
Article 5.20.43.
5.20.46 Workload: The normal maximum teaching workload is twenty-one (21) credits of which a maximum of nine (9)
may be assigned in the
Spring Session. The workload shall include an additional 3 credits to be used towards teaching, governance or scholarly
work at the discretion of the member.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 87

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Members may request one day free from teaching for teaching preparation and grading.
This request shall not be unreasonably denied.
In order to promote scholarly activity and professional development, Master Lecturers shall have access to the process
outlined in
Article 5.40.10
For new Master Lecturer appointments with a probationary status as defined in Article
5.20.45, a three (3) credit course reduction shall be applied for each of the first (1st) two
(2) years.
5.20.47 Transfer to Tenure Track Faculty Ranks:
Master Lecturers may be appointed to a tenure track faculty position without advertising. Such appointments shall be
made by the Vice-President, Academic and Provost upon recommendation of the
Department/School and the Dean under the following conditions:
(a) The Vice President, Academic and
Provost has authorized a tenure track faculty position for the
Department/School.
(b) The Chair/Director of the
Department/School has made available an application file for viewing by all Members of the
Department/School and has arranged interviews and open meetings with the candidate and
Members in the Department/School, on campus or through teleconference.
(c) A majority of the full-time Members of the Department/School by vote have approved of the recommendation, including
the term of the appointment where applicable
5.20.48 The starting salary of an applicant shall be based on the floor of Lecturer. For applicants with a PhD, the starting
salary shall be based on the floor of Assistant. The Members shall be given one (1) increment for each year of full-time
equivalent (i.e. twenty-one (21) credits per year) at the university level. Other relevant experience shall be considered.
The position shall not contain ranks or promotion.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 88

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Effective July 1, 2017, Master Lecturers with a
PhD and whose salary is below the floor of the
Assistant Professor rank shall be provided a salary increase to the floor of the Assistant
Professor rank.
Effective July 1, 2017, all Master Lecturers with a PhD. shall receive a salary increase equivalent to one (1) increment.
5.20.49 Redundancies for Master Lecturers will be governed by Article 10 consistent with other full-time faculty.
5.20.50 The University may appoint a maximum of thirty-seven (37) Master Lecturers.
5.20.51 Exigencies for Master Lecturers will be governed by Article 10 consistent with other full-time faculty.
ARTICLE 5.25 – EMPLOYMENT EQUITY
5.25.1 The Parties support the principle of employment equity as defined by Provincial and Federal Laws and the
Senate/Board of
Governors approved Policy on Employment
Equity.
5.25.2 Employment Equity
(a) The Parties pledge themselves to work to increase the proportion of faculty
Members who are members of the four
(4) designated employment equity groups (women, aboriginal people, persons with disabilities and members of visible
minorities) to an equitable level in each discipline.
(b) To determine an equitable proportion of Members of the four (4) designated employment equity groups for each
discipline, the Parties shall consider among other factors the number of
Doctoral applicants in Canadian universities as revealed by Statistics
Canada data.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 89

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
5.25.3 The Vice-President, Academic and Provost shall support employment equity by:
(a) promoting awareness of the
University’s commitment to non- discrimination and to the promotion of equity in the employment status of
Members in the designated employment equity groups;
(b) ensuring proper training on equitable employment practices for all
Departments/Schools hiring new
Members;
(c) providing annual reports to the
Employer and the Union on:
(i) the total number of applicants and the number of self-identified applicants by employment equity group for each vacant
position for which a search has been conducted,
(ii) the composition by employment equity group of the Members in each Department/School, by rank and status of
appointment, as voluntarily reported by
Members,
(iii) the percentage of employment equity groups by discipline in graduate degree programs in
Canada, if available,
(iv) other matters deemed necessary to monitor the effectiveness of this Article.
5.25.4 In order to increase awareness of the
University’s employment equity goals and to support non-discriminatory interview and hiring practices, full-time Members
shall make every reasonable effort to attend the training sessions on equitable employment practices offered by the
University for their respective
Department/School.
ARTICLE 5.30 – ABORIGINAL EQUITY INITIATIVE
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 90

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
5.30.1 The Employer and the Union agree that a series of active measures are required to appoint a larger number of
qualified Aboriginal professors, librarians and archivists at
Laurentian University, particularly outside
Aboriginal-specific programs.
5.30.2 The Employer agrees to develop a “grow-our- own” program to recruit and appoint Aboriginal professors, librarians
and archivists to probationary appointments, who, on the condition of agreeing to work at Laurentian as
professors/librarians for a minimum of three
(3) years, shall be supported in completing the academic qualifications needed for tenure (per
Article 5.10 – Academic Qualifications
Guidelines). The details of the program are to be agreed to by the Employer and the Union in consultation with the Office
of the Associate
Vice-President, Academic and Indigenous
Programs.
ARTICLE 5.35 – NEWLY HIRED MEMBERS
5.35.1 In the year the Collective Agreement is being negotiated, all new hires whose appointments are effective July 1 or
before the signing of a new Collective Agreement shall receive all increases in salary for that year that become effective
July 1, except for the PTR increment, merit increment, or any other increase explicitly excluded by the new Collective
Agreement, irrespective of the actual date of commencement of employment.
ARTICLE 5.40 – ACADEMIC WORKLOAD
5.40.1 The academic workload shall be assigned in a fair and equitable manner. To help ensure this goal, each Member
of a Department/School shall receive a copy of the Chair's/Director’s recommendations to the Dean/University
Librarian on the Member's own workload and a summary of the recommendations on all other Members in the
Department/School, including any recommendations for overloads, prior to the recommendations being forwarded to the
Dean/University Librarian. Each
Member shall receive by April 1 a copy of the
Dean's/University Librarian's decision on these recommendations.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 91

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
5.40.2 The academic workload of a full-time Member during the academic year includes: (a) teaching/professional
librarianship/archives management, including the supervision of graduate and undergraduate students; (b) scholarly
activity, including commitments to external granting agencies; (c) University governance, administrative duties, and other
contributions to the University. The normal guideline for the distribution of the workload among the three (3) main
workload components is: forty percent (40%) teaching/professional librarianship/archives management, including the
supervision of graduate and undergraduate students; forty percent (40%) scholarly activity, including commitments to
external granting agencies; and twenty percent (20%) University governance, administrative duties, and other
contributions to the University.
5.40.3 (a) The assignment of the workload shall be communicated in reasonable detail, in writing, to the Member by April
1 by the
Dean/University Librarian. The
Dean/University Librarian shall request the written advice of the Department/School concerned. The Chair/Director shall
submit the written advice of the Department/School by February 15 and the Dean/University
Librarian shall not unreasonably refuse the advice of the Department/School. The time- tabling of the teaching load/library
assignment shall be communicated in writing to the
Member by July 15 by the Dean/University
Librarian after consultation with the Registrar.
For the duration of this Collective Agreement the Registrar shall have final authority in time- tabling all courses.
(b) The following information will be provided in workload letters which will be made available in the Department/School
office: i. All courses being taught including the full course code, the term, language of instruction, mode of delivery and the
assigned Senate credit weighting for the course; ii. All overloads; iii. All participants in any co-teaching assignment; iv. All
unpaid courses;
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 92

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 v. All non-instructional work with a credit weighting or stipend and a code identifying the
nature of the work; vi. All buyouts; vii. All leaves.
5.40.4 The composition of the workload of Members may vary with their discipline, and will take into account the
capabilities of the Members, the need to maximize their potential and any obligations placed on them within the
University's operations, consistent with the terms of this Collective Agreement. In the assignment of teaching loads, the
Deans, in consultation with the Departments/Schools, shall consider not only the number of courses taught by a Member,
but the size and type of such courses as well as administrative and other duties. Members’ workloads shall also be
subject to the following maximum norms for assigned workloads.
(a) Teaching Members: In the assignment of teaching loads by the Deans, in consultation with the academic
Departments/Schools, the maximum normal teaching load per academic year shall be two (2) full courses or twelve (12)
credit equivalents in the Faculty of
Science, Engineering and Architecture and two and one-half (2 ½) full courses or fifteen (15) credit equivalents in other
Faculties.
Effective July 1st, 2017 the current practices (2014-2017) regarding the application of coordinator credits and student
supervision shall not change.
(b) Professional Librarian and Archivist
Members: In the assignment of workloads by the University Librarian, the normal hours of scheduled student contact shall
not exceed twelve (12) per week, scheduled fairly and equitably and on the recommendation of the Department.
(c) Notwithstanding Article 5.40.4 (a) above,
Members on a twelve (12) month limited- term appointment may have a teaching load of three (3) credits above the
normal teaching load. This above-normal teaching load shall be for a maximum of
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 93

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 twelve (12) months only. Any extension of the twelve (12) month limited-term
appointment or any additional limited- term appointments to the Member shall be according to the normal teaching load as
specified as per Article5.40.4 (a) above.
(d) The Parties agree that it is mutually beneficial to allow Members to bank or owe teaching credits as outlined below.
The banking or owing of teaching credits will be permitted in the following cases:
I. The Member proposes to arrange a teaching-reduced or teaching-free term for the purposes of scholarly activity
II. The total credit value of the
Member’s normal assigned teaching load deviates by not more than six (6) credits from the normal maximum teaching
load
III. The Member undertakes academic supervision of an individual student pursuant to
Article 5.40.8 (h)
IV. Courses assigned as part of the Member’s normal workload are cancelled because of zero enrolment
Members shall not normally be permitted to bank or owe more than six
(6) teaching credits at any given time.
Members with banked teaching credits may request a maximum of six (6) credits release per academic year.
The scheduling of the reduction shall be with the mutual agreement of the
Member and the Dean. No remuneration for banked teaching credits will be provided in lieu of release time. If the
Member’s
Department/School agrees with the
Member’s proposal to arrange a teaching-reduced or teaching-free term for the purposes of scholarly activity and
recommends it to the Dean for approval, the Dean shall not unreasonably refuse such a
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 94

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 recommendation. Members owing three (3) or more teaching credits shall undertake to
teach a course above the normal teaching load without remuneration within three (3) years of the end of the term during
which the total number of credits owing reached three (3).
In the event that the Member leaves his/her employment due to retirement, resignation, death or dismissal, the
Member shall not be entitled to remuneration for any banked teaching credits, nor shall he/she be required to repay any
teaching credits owing at the time of the termination of employment.
5.40.5 The Dean/University Librarian may include in
Members' workloads any teaching/professional library or archival assignment related to their discipline and any
on-campus administrative activity that the
Dean/University Librarian considers necessary for the effective operation of the
Faculty/Library or of the University program.
With regard to the load for teaching/professional librarianship/professional archival work, generally prevailing past
practices shall apply unless these practices have been the result of
Members undertaking voluntarily unpaid overloads to maintain the integrity of programmes or service commitments in
Department/Schools which have suffered complement reductions due to budgetary pressures or unless specific
provisions in this contract state otherwise.
5.40.6 The determination of the workload shall be subject to the following conditions:
(a) The Dean/University Librarian, in accordance with Article 3.10 –
Academic Freedom, shall not impose specific scholarly tasks other than the teaching/professional librarianship duties
referred to in Article 5.40.5 above. Specific tasks related to the internal governance of the
Department/School shall not be imposed by the Dean/University
Librarian, except for the appointment of an Acting Chair/Director as in Articles
9.15 – Selection of Chairs/Directors and 9.20 – Term of Office of
Chairs/Directors. The Dean/University
Librarian may assign specific
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 95

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 responsibilities concerning a
University-related community activity in consultation with the Member. The
Member shall not unreasonably refuse.
(b) The Dean/University Librarian shall normally not impose on any individual a workload in excess of that which in the
past has generally been applicable to Members within the Faculty/Library to which the Member belongs. The
Parties agree that excessive overload teaching/professional library work is undesirable and for that reason compensation
for teaching-related overloads from all sources, including courses administered through the
Centre for Continuing Education, shall be limited to a maximum of twelve (12) credits per year with a maximum of nine (9)
credits in either the Fall/Winter or the Spring/Summer sessions, the
Parties further agree that the twelve
(12) credit overload allowance shall be limited to three (3) consecutive years. i. Where the above limitation on total
compensation to a Member involves a component from the supervision of a distance education course(s) according to
Article 8.40.5 of Article 8.40 –
Distance Education Courses, the
University shall make available marking assistance as required and in keeping with the degree of limitation.
(c) From time to time, the Dean/University
Librarian, in consultation with the
Department/School may request a
Member to undertake additional duties over and above the normal workload.
In such instances, an overload payment shall be made, as in Article
8.35 – Overloads. The Member shall not unreasonably refuse such assignments. Members who believe they are entitled
to overload payments shall apply through the Dean/University
Librarian to the Vice-President,
Academic and Provost within ten (10) working days after the assignment of the workload. The Vice-President,
Academic and Provost shall provide an answer, in writing, to the Member within ten (10) working days of her/his
application. If negative, the decision shall be accompanied with reasons.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 96

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
(d) In the event that a workload assignment, with regard to the courses taught or professional librarian duties or other
assigned duties, is not acceptable to the Member or the
Department/School, after discussion with the Dean/University Librarian, the
Member or the Department/School may appeal to the Vice-President,
Academic and Provost by April 7. The decision of the Vice-President,
Academic and Provost shall be communicated in writing to the
Member and Department/School before April 21.
(e) The credits for courses approved by
Senate (Council on English Language
Programmes (CELP) and Conseil des programmes en français (CPF)) shall not be altered when the Dean assigns the
teaching of any of these courses to a Member. However, the workload credit for a faculty Member is subject to the
provisions of this Article 5.40.6 and
Article 5.40.8 i. Human Kinetics activity courses will be weighted at 2.25 credits. ii. It is agreed and understood that where
Members engage in the supervisory work set out in
5.40.8 (h) they will be compensated as provided therein. iii. It is further agreed and understood that unless a course, as
approved by the
Senate, requires scheduled classroom teaching, or as otherwise agreed by the parties, there will be no workload credit.
(f) When a Member is assigned to teach two (2) or more courses at the same time and location, she/he shall receive
workload credit for the course with maximum credits.
5.40.7 Once assigned, workloads shall not be altered except in cases of emergency. If a proposed workload must be
altered, such alteration will be taken into consideration in the annual performance evaluation. However, alterations for
reasonable program requirements and low enrolment may be made to Winter and Spring
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 97

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 session courses by October 1.
If the Dean, for non-emergency reasons, deems it necessary to alter the workload of a
Member once it has been assigned, the Dean must obtain the agreement of the Member.
Any alteration to a Member’s workload, including any associated overload payments shall be communicated to each
Member of the
Department/School within five (5) working days after the Member has been formally notified of the change.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this Article, when an assigned course(s) is cancelled because of zero registration in the
course(s) there arises an obligation on the part of the
Member to undertake additional work in order to maintain fairness and equity within the
Department/School. The nature and extent of such work shall be determined in discussions between the Member, the
Chair of the
Department/School and the Dean. In the event that the Member was scheduled to receive an overload stipend such a
stipend should be reduced appropriately. In the case where additional work assigned is in the form of a course, such
course shall be one the
Member has taught in the last two (2) years, unless otherwise agreed to by the Member.
5.40.8 The determination of the workload for
Members of the teaching faculty shall also be subject to the following conditions:
(a) A Member is entitled to one (1) term without scheduled teaching among the
Fall, Winter and Spring terms as part of her/his normal workload. The scheduled teaching duties as part of a
Member’s normal workload shall normally be in the Fall and Winter terms of the academic year.
(b) In the case of distance education courses or off-campus courses, consultation times shall be arranged for the teaching
locale in accordance with the requirements of the subject matter. The Chair/Director shall outline the norms in consultation
with the Department/School.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 98

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
(c) In the case of evening courses, the Dean shall not assign another course scheduled to begin within twelve (12) hours
of the scheduled end of the evening course unless the Member agrees to this in writing.
(d) With the exception of Members who are teaching at this University for the first time or teaching in a new program, no
Member shall be required in an academic year to prepare for more than one (1) full course or two (2) half
(1/2) courses (or equivalent) which she/he has not taught at least once during the previous four (4) years.
Normally, no Member shall be required to undertake such course preparation more than once every two (2) years, nor
shall any Member be required to undertake new course preparation unless requested to do so by June 1.
Where a course is replaced by a renamed or renumbered version of what is essentially the same course in the same
language, it shall be deemed to be the same course for purposes of this Article.
(e) Members may be required to supervise or develop distance education courses as part of their normal workload subject
to provisions of Article 8.40 –
Distance Education Courses. Members whose appointments specifically included the development of distance education
courses as part of their normal workload may be assigned such duties for the duration of their contract(s).
(f) In order to enhance the ability of
Members to undertake scholarly activity, it is desirable to schedule the teaching activities in such a way as to create
blocks of time free of scheduled teaching activities. For the Fall and
Winter terms, the scheduling of courses shall permit every Member to have at least one (1) day per week for scholarly
activity during which she/he is not expected to teach scheduled classes. Members wishing to create additional such days
or blocks of time without scheduled teaching shall approach the Chair/Director of the
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 99

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Departments/Schools and the Dean with an appropriate request. These officials shall make reasonable efforts to
accommodate such requests within the constraints imposed by requirements of offering programs and courses to
students. When competing requests for time blocks without scheduled teaching cannot be met for all applicants, priority
shall be given to those individuals who earlier have been unsuccessful in making such a request, provided that these were
based on bona fide requirements to enhance scholarly activity.
(g) Full-time Members teaching in programs where the preparation of a thesis is mandatory for students have an
obligation to participate in the thesis supervision provided that they are qualified to do so. However, the Parties agree that
the close working relationship desirable for the successful preparation of a thesis is best achieved under conditions that
allow for mutual choice on the part of the Member and the student before entering the supervisor/student relationship.
(h) Notwithstanding Article 5.40.6 (e) above, when a Member undertakes academic supervision of an individual student in
a program offered by
Laurentian University, when such work is over and above the normal workload, such supervisory work shall be recognized
upon its successful defence or completion as follows:
Monetary value
Credit
Supervisory work at $1,000 / credit value
PhD Thesis 3 $3,000
Master’s Thesis or 1 $1,000
Advanced Practicum in
Social Work
PhD or Master’s Research ½ $500
Project, Research Essay,
Directed Reading Seminar or Independent Study
Undergraduate Thesis (cid:110) $333
Undergraduate Directed ¼ $250
Reading Seminar or
Independent Study where
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 100

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 mandatory
(i) The above credits may be shared by agreement between two (2) or more Members who have contributed to the thesis
or other supervision. In cases of disagreement, the Dean shall arbitrate the proportions.
(ii) A Member’s teaching credits for individual supervisions as outlined in this paragraph can be accumulated towards a
reduction of the Member’s normal teaching load to a maximum of three (3) credits release per academic year.
Unused credits can be carried over to subsequent years. The scheduling of the reduction shall be with the mutual
agreement of the Member and her/his Dean.
(iii) Alternatively, Members may be paid the credit value accumulated for any supervisory work in their professional
expenditure account. At any time, Members may transfer the monetary value of the accumulated credits into their
professional development expenditure account.
(iv) Once the supervisory work has been completed, it shall be the responsibility of the Member to report such completion
to the
Dean on a form co-signed by her/his Chair/Director. The
Dean’s Office shall either register the credit on the
Member’s workload credit account to be created in Datatel or transfer the funds to the
Member’s professional development expenditure account, as the Member directs.
(v) Based on existing program requirements, the Dean shall identify those programs which
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 101

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 have mandatory supervisory needs as per Article 5.40.8 (g) above. Any Member
planning to supervise an individual student in another program for credit under this paragraph needs the prior
authorization of the Dean.
(vi) Research Chairs shall be eligible for the monetary value only in Articles 5.40.8 (h) (i) to
5.40.8 (h) (iv) above.
5.40.9 The determination of the workload for professional librarians shall also be subject to the following conditions:
(a) Members may be requested to offer service during one (1) evening per week and if requested, they shall not
unreasonably refuse, provided that such requests are made on a fair and equitable basis.
(b) Professional librarians may be expected to carry library supervisory duties.
5.40.10 In order to promote scholarly activity, as defined by section B) Scholarly Activity of
Article 5.15 – Rights, Responsibilities and
Duties of Academics within the University, a
Member may have her/his teaching/library service workload altered. Requests for workload reductions as a result of other
paid activity shall be considered in accordance with the provisions of Article 7.35 – Voluntary
Reduced Workload. However, contract research where the Member is paid a stipend not to exceed twenty thousand
dollars
($20,000) for her/his services may be considered under this provision.
(a) Without compensation to the
University:
For such an assignment to become operative, it shall require the recommendation of the
Department/School, of the
Dean/University Librarian, and approval of the Vice-President,
Academic and Provost. Faculty
Members who receive one (1) or more
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 102

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 course reductions for purposes of enhancing scholarly activity, including the preparation
of teaching materials for the Centre for Continuing
Education, shall not be entitled to overloads as per Article5.40.6 (b) above. This restriction shall also apply to Librarians
and Archivists whose workload is also reduced for scholarly purposes.
(b) With compensation to the University:
A Member with a regular teaching load may elect to buy-out of up to fifteen
(15) credits of teaching load over five
(5) years, not to exceed six (6) credits per year, or the equivalent of professional library service in order to concentrate on
research activities. It is acknowledged that certain grants may require a reduction in teaching loads exceeding fifteen (15)
credits. The buy- out must be applied for no later than
February 1 of the year preceding the academic year for which it is requested and the Dean/University Librarian shall not
unreasonably refuse such request.
The Dean/University Librarian shall communicate her/his decision by April
1. The buy-out shall cover the actual cost (including benefits) to replace the teaching/professional library work but shall
not exceed the overload or sessional rate of pay as appropriate. A
Member shall not be refused such a request for two (2) consecutive years.
5.40.11 As per Article 5.40.10 (a) Members can request a reduced teaching load to increase scholarly activity. Members
may opt to do unpaid overloads to offset scholarly activity requirements. However, a paid overload is work performed
above the normal workload and does not offset scholarly activity or governance requirements.
5.40.12 The workload of any or all Members shall be made known to the Union on request.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 103

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
5.40.13 It is acknowledged that the provision of teaching assistants is a factor to be considered in the assignment of
workloads.
As such the Vice-President, Academic and
Provost will ensure to the greatest degree possible the equitable distribution amongst the
Faculties of such assistance, consistent with the identified needs of the Department/School.
ARTICLE 5.41 – MIDWIFERY PROGRAM
5.41.1 For the purposes of this Collective Agreement, the Midwifery program shall be treated as a
Department/School.
5.41.2 It is understood that each Midwifery faculty
Member will be employed by Laurentian
University for a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of a full-time position with the requirement that the faculty Member
maintain a midwifery practice sufficient to qualify and maintain current registration with the College of
Midwives.
A Member may request an increase in workload while maintaining professional registration.
Where extra courses are available, full-time
Members may request to increase their workload up to one hundred percent (100%) with a commensurate increase in
salary. Such request will be submitted in accordance with
Article 5.40 - Academic Workload.
5.41.3 For the application of tenure and promotion policies, assessment criteria and standards will reflect the actual
workload. All relevant timelines shall continue to apply, and will not be pro-rated on the basis of workload.
5.41.4 Midwifery Faculty Members have the right to benefits and to contribute to the benefits plan of the University in
accordance with the provisions of the Collective Agreement for sharing contributions.
(a) Sick leave. Members will be covered for periods of sick leave to the extent of the actual salary paid during that period
as per Article 7.55 – Physical and Mental Illness.
(b) Long-Term Disability. Members must be provided with specific information
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 104

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 concerning coverage for Long-Term
Disability at the time of appointment.
(c) Pension Plan. Members may contribute to the pension plan on the basis of their actual salary.
(d) Life Insurance. Life insurance may be carried based on the Member's actual salary.
(e) Sabbatical Leave. Salary received on sabbatical shall be pro-rated to reflect the average workload of the qualifying
years. All relevant timelines shall continue to apply, and will not be pro- rated on the basis of workload.
ARTICLE 5.45 – ANNUAL REPORT FOR MEMBERS
5.45.1 All full-time Members, except those on sabbatical or study leave who have given prior notice to their
Dean/University Librarian of their intent to postpone submission until their return, shall submit a report in electronic and
paper format, on their activities for the preceding twelve (12) months to the Office of the Dean/University Librarian, by May
15. The report will cover all components of her/his responsibilities as listed under Article
5.15 – Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of
Academics.
Members on sabbatical or study leave are covered by Article 7.25 – Sabbatical Leaves and 7.30 – Study Leave
respectively.
5.45.2 In preparing their reports, Members shall use the appropriate standardized form developed for each Faculty and
the Library.
5.45.3 It is also the responsibility of the Members to provide annually an up-to-date and corrected curriculum vitae for their
personnel file.
ARTICLE 5.50 – ASSESSMENT OF A MEMBER'S
PERFORMANCE
5.50.1 When making assessments on contract renewal (Article 5.20 – Appointment and
Renewal), tenure (Article 5.60 – Tenure
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 105

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Evaluation Procedures), promotion (Article
5.65 – Promotion Procedures) and merit increments (Article 8.25 – Merit Increments), the assessors shall consider the
Member’s performance in the areas outlined in Article
5.15 – Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of
Academics.
5.50.2 The assessors may consider as mitigating factors:
(a) The bilingual and tricultural character of Laurentian University.
(b) In the case of Librarians/Archivist, the amount of time available for scholarly activities.
5.50.3 The assessment of a Member's teaching performance shall be based on Senate approved course evaluations and
the
Member's annual teaching dossier.
(a) During each term of the academic year, the Employer shall administer the course evaluations approved by the
Laurentian University Senate. The
Vice-President, Academic and Provost shall be responsible for the distribution and collection of the said instruments.
It is agreed that Members shall have access to the results of course evaluations prior to their use by the
University.
In the case of co-taught courses, the following shall apply:
(i) For courses co-taught sequentially, there shall be separate evaluations for each professor prior to the end of each
sequence.
(ii) For all other co-taught courses, the information provided to the assessors will indicate that the evaluation in question
shall be viewed with caution.
Should a Member feel that a course should be exempt from the approved
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 106

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 evaluation process, reasons for exemption should be addressed to the
Vice-President, Academic and Provost no later than the end of the first week of classes in that course. The Vice-
President, Academic and Provost will communicate her/his decision on the request prior to the planned date of the course
evaluation.
(b) It is the responsibility of Members to maintain on an annual basis their teaching dossiers. For each course, the annual
dossier must contain at least the following material:
(i) Course syllabus and sufficient material to permit an evaluation of the contents of the course, the teaching/learning
process, and the means of assessing the performance of the students.
(ii) Sufficient material to permit the evaluation of the Member's teaching performance as perceived by groups such as
graduates, peers, or students.
(iii) The file should also contain any other material that the Member deems relevant to her/his teaching role.
(iv) In the case of co-taught courses, the Member shall include in the dossier information about which parts of the course/s
fell within her/his responsibility for course preparation, scheduled classroom, laboratory and tutorial time with students,
evaluation of students, and course administration.
(c) Assessors shall use the results of the teaching evaluations in their assessments with the understanding that these
evaluations comprise only one part of a Member’s teaching dossier.
5.50.4 Notwithstanding the priorities for teaching/librarianship/archival management and/or scholarly activities as noted in
the
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 107

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 various Articles in this Collective Agreement, the Parties recognise that the University
benefits greatly from significant contributions in many areas including academic administration and/or university
governance, continuous involvement in a Member's professional/learned society or in a community activity directly related
to the work of the
University. The Parties agree that Members who have made such contributions shall have these contributions taken into
especial account as compensating for lesser performance in another area.
Notwithstanding the priorities for scholarly activities as noted in the various Articles in this Collective Agreement, the
Parties recognise that the University benefits greatly from the contributions of Members who are exceptional teachers.
Members who can make such a contribution shall have this taken into especial account as compensating for lesser
performance in another area. When considering librarians/archivists, professional service and library management skills
shall be substituted for "teaching".
Assessment Procedures
5.50.5 The applicant shall submit her/his academic dossier to the Dean/University Librarian by
July 2, who shall make a copy available to the
Department/School by September 1.
Members of the Department/School who are eligible to participate in the assessment shall have access to the applicant’s
dossier. The applicant shall have the right to update her/his academic dossier until such time as the
Department/School has made its assessment.
Any updates to the academic dossier shall be brought to the attention of the Vice-President,
Academic and Provost before the decision is rendered.
5.50.6 No later than July 15, the Union shall receive from the Employer a list of all applications being made by Members
during the current academic year.
5.50.7 The assessors shall put forward their recommendation in written form setting forth their findings and grounds for
recommendation in order that the applicant may know which factors were persuasive in a recommendation. In all
considerations of renewal, tenure, promotion and merit increments, the assessors shall use the following assessment
procedures:
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 108

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Dean/University Librarian
(a) The Dean/University Librarian shall prepare an independent letter of assessment of the application. In assessing
applicants, the
Dean/University Librarian shall not see internal or external letters of assessment before submitting her/his own
independent letter of assessment of the applicant.
The Dean/University Librarian may take into account but not be limited to those parts of the applicant’s current personnel
file that are relevant to the matter being discussed. The applicant shall be provided with a list of material from the
personnel file that is being considered and that has not accompanied the application. In the case of applicants who submit
updates to their academic dossier before
September 1, the Dean/University
Librarian shall consider such changes and amend the letter as necessary.
The Dean/University Librarian shall forward her/his own independent letter of assessment of the applicant simultaneously
to the Chair of the
Faculty Personnel Committee and to the applicant by September 1 for renewal and tenure applications, and by October 1
for promotion and merit applications. The applicant has the right to respond in writing to the
Dean’s/University Librarian’s independent letter of assessment of the applicant within five (5) working days of its receipt.
The applicant shall send her/his response, if any, directly to the Chair of the Faculty Personnel
Committee.
For promotions to the rank of Full
Professor/Librarian, the
Dean/University Librarian may append additional comments to the assessment within one (1) week of receiving the
reports of the external assessors. These assessments shall be made available to Members as soon as they are prepared
and at least one (1) week before a Faculty
Personnel Committee considers a given case.
Department/School Assessment
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 109

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Committee
(b) Only tenured Members of the appropriate Department(s)/School(s) are eligible to participate in the assessment
process except under the circumstances defined in Article 5.50.7
(i).
Each tenured Member has a responsibility to participate and to vote in the assessment process. Members on sabbatical
or other leaves, excluding leaves of absence without pay or long-term disability, have the right to participate and to vote in
the assessment process.
(c) In a timely fashion and with sufficient notice the Chair/Director of the
Department/School or designate shall convene a meeting of the eligible
Members to assess the applicant’s academic dossier. Those eligible shall meet as often as necessary for the purpose of
writing a joint single letter of assessment for the application. A vote on the application shall occur and be recorded. The
eventual joint single letter of assessment shall be forwarded to the Chair of the relevant FPC.
(d) The proceedings of the meetings are to be undertaken in camera. It is understood that nothing in this Article shall
prevent a Member from discussing with the Union concerns about potential breaches of the
Collective Agreement.
(e) In exceptional circumstances, where an eligible Member is unable to attend
Department/School assessment committee meetings, the Member may submit to the committee an individual letter of
assessment with her/his recommendation and vote, both of which shall be incorporated into the joint single letter of
assessment of the
Department/School. The individual letter of assessment with her/his recommendation and vote shall be provided and read
to the
Department/School assessment committee during the course of its deliberations.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 110

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
(f) The joint single letter of assessment shall address the criteria outlined in
Article 5.15 – Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of Academics and contained in the assessment form in
Appendices C-I – Department/School
Assessment Form. The letter shall state the recommendation, the reasons and evidence for the recommendation, the
votes for and against the recommendation, and the names of
Members participating in the assessment process. There shall be no abstentions. The joint single letter of assessment
shall include both majority and minority recommendations and reasons for the different recommendations where
Members request. Prior to its submission, the assessment committee’s joint single letter of assessment shall be reviewed
by all participants in the assessment process for final approval of its accuracy.
(g) The Chair/Director of the
Department/School shall forward the assessment of the application by the assessment committee to the Chair of the
Faculty Personnel Committee not later than October 15 for renewal and tenure applications and not later than
November 15 for promotion and merit applications. The Chair of the Faculty
Personnel Committee will forward the unit assessment to the applicant once he/she has verified that the proper process
has been followed. The applicant has the right to respond in writing to the assessment by the assessment committee
within five (5) working days of its receipt. The applicant shall send her/his response, if any, directly to the Chair of the
Faculty Personnel Committee.
(h) All letters of assessment internal to the
University shall be signed and the recommendations shall be based on evidence.
(i) In Departments/Schools with fewer than four (4) eligible colleagues apart from the applicant, the applicant’s
Dean/University Librarian in consultation with the
Department/School and approval of the
Union, shall add eligible Members from other Departments/Schools so that a minimum of four (4) eligible Members
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 111

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 is attained.
(j) Where the applicant is appointed to more than one (1) Department/School, a written assessment concerning the
contributions the applicant has made to the cross-appointed
Department/School shall be undertaken by the cross-appointed
Department/School provided in accordance with the terms specified in
Article 5.20.32 and Article 5.20.33 of
Article 5.20 – Appointment and
Renewal. The complete assessment of the applicant by the assessment committee of the Department/School of primary
responsibility and the written assessment of the cross-appointed
Department/School shall be weighted by the Faculty Personnel Committee to reflect proportionately the extent of the
Member’s responsibilities in each of the Departments/Schools. The applicant has the right to respond to the written
assessment of the cross- appointed Department/School in writing within five (5) working days of its receipt. The applicant
shall send her/his response, if any, directed to the
Chair of the Faculty Personnel
Committee.
Faculty Personnel Committee
(k) Within two (2) working days of the receipt of the Department/School’s letter of assessment, the Chair of the
Faculty Personnel Committee shall make available to the Faculty
Personnel Committee, the academic dossier of the applicant, the letter of assessment by the
Department/School, the letter of assessment by the Dean/University
Librarian, the written representations by the applicant, and any external letters of assessment.
(l) Any required external letters of assessment as per Article 5.65 –
Promotion Procedures shall be sent directly to the Vice-President,
Academic and Provost, who shall edit these external letters of assessment only to conceal the identities of the external
assessors. The Vice-
President, Academic and Provost shall then forward the external letters of assessment simultaneously to the
Chair of the Faculty Personnel
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 112

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Committee and the applicant. The applicant has the right to respond in writing to the external letters of assessment within
five (5) working days of its receipt.
(m) When the Faculty Personnel
Committee has completed its deliberations in accordance with its responsibilities as outlined in Article
5.55 – Faculty Personnel Committee, the Chair shall prepare a letter reflecting the substantive and comprehensive
reasons for the endorsements or refusal of endorsements contained in the assessment review form as per
Appendices
K -Q Faculty Personnel Committee
Assessment Review Form. Where appropriate, the completed letter shall include minority and majority views.
The assessment letter of the Faculty
Personnel Committee shall contain the following paragraph: "The Member may make written representations to the
Vice-President, Academic and
Provost within ten (10) working days of the date on which the Faculty
Personnel Committee forwards to the
Member a copy of its assessment letter to the Vice-President, Academic and
Provost."
The Chair of the Faculty Personnel
Committee shall forward the assessment letter to the Vice-
President, Academic and Provost, with a copy to the applicant, by December
15 for renewal and tenure applications, and by February 15 for promotion and merit applications, with the exception of
applications for promotion to Full
Professor/Librarian.
Decision of the Vice-President, Academic and
Provost
5.50.8 The decision of the Vice-President, Academic and Provost on the application shall be based solely on the content
of the assessment file which includes the recommendations of the assessors, the review of the Faculty
Personnel Committee, any written representations from the Member and any external letters of assessment. The decision
of the Vice-President, Academic and Provost shall be communicated in writing to the
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 113

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Member with a copy to the Union. The letter shall include substantive and comprehensive reasons for the decision.
In the case of applications for renewal and tenure, the decision of the Vice-President,
Academic and Provost shall be communicated to the Member no later than March 1 of the academic year in which the
Member is being considered. If the decision of the Vice-
President, Academic and Provost on renewal and tenure applications is not communicated to the Member by March 1, the
Member shall be guaranteed employment for the next academic year.
In the case of applications for merit and promotion, with the exception of promotion to
Full Professor/Librarian, the decision of the
Vice-President, Academic and Provost shall be communicated to the Member no later than
April 15 of the academic year in which the
Member is being considered.
5.50.9 No later than May 15, the Union shall receive a summary from the Employer of the work of the Faculty Personnel
Committee and the decisions of the Vice-President, Academic and Provost during the current academic year.
Timelines
5.50.10 The Timetable for the assessment process shall be as follows:
Deadline Steps Article
March 1 Secretary of Senate to issue Article 5.55 – a call for nominations for Faculty
Faculty Personnel Personnel
Committee positions Committee
April 15 Secretary of Senate to Article 5.55 – ensure that Faculty Faculty
Personnel Committee Personnel positions have been filled Committee
May 1 Member may request a delay Article 5.60 – of up to two (2) years in the Tenure tenure review process, if Evaluation
Member had to deal with Procedures heavier than normal personal responsibilities or extraordinary circumstances
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 114

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
June 1 Vice-President, Academic Article 5.60 – and Provost to render Tenure decision on delay in tenure Evaluation
review Procedures
July 2 Deadline for submission of Article 5.50 – applications for renewal, Assessment of tenure, promotion and merit a
Member’s to the Dean/University Performance
Librarian
July 15 Employer to provide Union Article 5.50 – with a list of all assessment Assessment of applications a Member’s
Performance
September Deadline for Dean/University Article 5.50 –
1 Librarian’s letter of Assessment of assessment on renewal and a Member’s tenure applications Performance
October 1 Deadline for Dean/University Article 5.50 –
Librarian’s letter of Assessment of assessment on promotion a Member’s and merit applications Performance
October 15 Deadline for Article 5.50 –
Department/School’s letter of Assessment of assessment on renewal and a Member’s tenure applications Performance
November Deadline for Article 5.50 –
15 Department/School’s letter of Assessment of assessment on promotion a Member’s and merit applications
Performance
December Deadline for Faculty Article 5.50 –
15 Personnel Committee’s letter Assessment of of assessment on renewal a Member’s and tenure applications
Performance
February Deadline for Faculty Article 5.50 –
15 Personnel Committee’s letter Assessment of of assessment on promotion a Member’s and merit applications
Performance
March 1 Deadline for Vice-President, Article 5.50 –
Academic and Provost’s Assessment of decision on renewal and a Member’s tenure applications Performance
April 15 Deadline for Vice-President, Article 5.50 –
Academic and Provost’s Assessment of decision on promotion and a Member’s merit applications, with the Performance
exception of application for promotion to Full
Professor/Librarian.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 115

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
May 15 Employer to provide Union Article 5.50 – with a summary of the work Assessment of of the Faculty Personnel a
Member’s
Committee and decisions of Performance the Vice-President,
Academic and Provost
ARTICLE 5.55 – FACULTY/FRANCOPHONE
FACULTY/LIBRARIANS AND ARCHIVISTS
PERSONNEL COMMITTEE
Role and Responsibilities
5.55.1 The role of the Faculty Personnel Committee shall be to undertake a review of the assessments by the
Department/School and the Dean/University Librarian on applications for contract renewal (Article 5.20 –
Appointment and Renewal), tenure (Article
5.60 – Tenure Evaluation Procedures), promotion (Article 5.65 – Promotion
Procedures) and merit increments (Article
8.25 – Merit Increments). In doing so, the
Faculty Personnel Committee shall help to ensure that all applications have been fairly and completely assessed
according to the terms of the Collective Agreement.
The review shall result in either an endorsement or a refusal to endorse the assessments. The Faculty Personnel
Committee shall communicate the result of its review, with comprehensive and substantive reasons, in writing to the
Vice-President,
Academic and Provost. The Faculty
Personnel Committee shall use the assessment review form provided in
Appendices K-P – Faculty Personnel
Committee Assessment Review Form.
The advice of the Faculty Personnel
Committee shall be considered by the Vice-
President, Academic and Provost in making a decision on the application.
5.55.2 In addition, the Faculty Personnel Committee has the responsibility to act as consultant on any other matters as
requested by the
University or required by the terms of this
Collective Agreement.
Structure of the Faculty Personnel Committees
5.55.3 In each Faculty there shall be a Faculty
Personnel Committee composed of five (5) elected Members plus two (2) alternates. A
Dean/University Librarian appointed by the
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 116

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Vice-President, Academic and Provost shall be the non-voting Chair. There shall be no more than two (2) Members
belonging to the same academic Department/School. Except as provided in Article 5.55.7 below, at least two (2) Members
shall be Full Professors from within that Faculty.
5.55.4 There shall also be a Francophone Faculty
Personnel Committee composed of five (5) elected Members plus two (2) alternates. The elected Members with the
lowest number of votes shall serve as the alternate. A
Dean/University Librarian appointed by the
Vice-President, Academic and Provost shall be the non-voting Chair.
All Members of the Francophone Faculty
Personnel Committee must be qualified
Francophone Members i.e., in the case of teaching faculty, the Member must have taught or be scheduled to teach a
course in
French at Laurentian and in the case of the librarian faculty, the Member must have provided or be schedule to provide
library service in French at Laurentian. In addition, two (2) of the six (6) Members of the committee must be Full
Professors/Librarians and Archivists, except as provided in Article
5.55.7 below. Potential candidates will be identified by the Vice-President, Academic and Provost.
Each application form for assessment, as per
Appendices C through I – Assessment
Application Template, shall include the following statement:
“Please indicate whether you wish to have your application reviewed by the Francophone
Faculty Personnel Committee. Yes or No.”
Applications are to be sent to the appropriate
Dean/University Librarian who will forward these to the non-voting Chair of the
Francophone Faculty Personnel Committee.
Once a Member has selected a Committee, the Member shall not apply to another
Committee either in that academic year or in the following year if the application were unsuccessful.
5.55.5 Members who conduct community-based research requiring engagement with First
Nations, Métis or Inuit communities may request that two (2) Members who also conduct community-based research
requiring engagement with First Nations, Métis or Inuit communities or who have taught or are scheduled to teach courses
in Indigenous programs at Laurentian University be elected to
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 117

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 the relevant FPC for a total of seven (7) voting
Members. Such Members may or may not self- identify as First Nations, Métis or Inuit. The office of the Associate VP
Academic and
Indigenous programs would determine the eligibility of Members to serve in this capacity for the duration of the Collective
Agreement.
5.55.6 In the Library, there shall be a Library Faculty
Personnel Committee composed of five (5) elected Members and one (1) alternate. Of the six (6) committee Members,
one (1) must be from the Library, and five (5) must be from a Faculty outside of the Library. In addition, two (2) of the six
(6) Members of the committee must be Full Professors/Librarians and Archivists, except as provided in Article
5.55.7 below. A Dean appointed by the Vice-
President, Academic and Provost shall be the non-voting Chair.
5.55.7 In the Faculty of Management, there shall be a Management Faculty Personnel Committee composed of five (5)
elected Members and one (1) alternate. Of the six (6) committee
Members, one (1) must be from the School of
Commerce and Administration, one (1) from the School of Sports Administration, and four
(4) from a Faculty/Library outside of the
Faculty of Management. In addition, two (2) of the six (6) Members of the committee must be Full
Professors/Librarians/Archivists, except as provided in Article 5.55.7 below. A
Dean/University Librarian appointed by the
Vice-President, Academic and Provost shall be the non-voting Chair.
5.55.8 In the Faculty of Education, there shall be a
Faculty of Education Personnel Committee composed of five (5) elected Members and one (1) alternate. Of the six (6)
committee
Members, one (1) must be from the School of
Education, one (1) must be from l’École des sciences de l’éducation and four (4) from a
Faculty/Library outside of the Faculty of
Education. In addition, two (2) of the six (6)
Members of the committee must be Full
Professors/Librarians/Archivists, except as provided in Article 5.55.7 below. A
Dean/University Librarian appointed by the
Vice-President, Academic and Provost shall be the non-voting Chair.
5.55.9 In the event that the requirements in Articles
5.55.3 to 5.55.8 above cannot be met, the first priority in dealing with insufficient Members at a rank shall be to seek
nominations by
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 118

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Members of that Faculty/Library of Members of another Faculty/Library at the required rank.
The second priority shall be to seek nominations by Members of that
Faculty/Library of Members from the next lower rank within the same Faculty/Library.
Election of the Faculty Personnel Committee
Members
5.55.10 The Secretary of Senate shall issue a call for nominations for the Faculty Personnel
Committee positions no later than March 1 for applications to be assessed in the following academic year including the
Members as identified in Article 5.55.5. The Employer and the Union each shall appoint one (1) scrutineer for the
elections.
5.55.11 The Secretary of Senate shall ensure that the
Faculty Personnel Committee positions have been filled by April 15 for applications to be assessed in the following
academic year.
5.55.12 Nominations shall be by Members of each
Faculty/Library. Voting shall be by Members of the faculty/library for Members of their own
Faculty Personnel Committee. All Members shall be entitled to vote for Members in Article
5.55.5. Qualified Francophone Members may vote in the elections for faculty representatives on both the Faculty
Personnel Committee and the Francophone Faculty Personnel
Committee. Every effort shall be made to seek nominations from both male and female
Members. Elections shall be conducted by the office of the Secretary of Senate by secret preferential ballot. The
alternates will be the nominee not elected who received the greatest number of votes.
5.55.13 Any tenured Member may be a member of the
Faculty Personnel Committee it being understood that:
(a) No Vice-Dean may be a committee member.
(b) The President of the Union and the
Chief Grievance Officer of the Union may not be committee members.
(c) An elected member may not serve for more than two (2) consecutive terms.
(d) A Member may not be a committee member during the academic year
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 119

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 she/he is on sabbatical.
(e) No Member may serve on more than one (1) Faculty Personnel Committee in the same academic year except for the
two Members identified in Article
5.55.5.
(f) Except in the case of the Library
Faculty Personnel Committee, the
Management Faculty Personnel
Committee, and the Education Faculty
Personnel Committee, a Faculty
Personnel Committee member may not review the assessments of an applicant from her/his own
Department/School. When required the member will be replaced by an alternate member. The member shall instead
participate in the assessment at the Department/School level.
5.55.14 In the event that any positions of an Faculty
Personnel Committee are not filled through the election process outlined, the
Dean/University Librarian, or in the case of the
Francophone Faculty Personnel Committee, the Vice-President, Academic and Provost, and an appointee of the Union’s
Board shall seek, within five (5) working days, a mutually acceptable candidate(s) who shall be named to serve.
Term of Office and Vacancies
5.55.15 The term of office of elected and appointed
Faculty Personnel Committee Members shall be two (2) years, starting on July 1 following the election. To ensure
continuity, terms shall be staggered.
5.55.16 A committee Member who makes an application for promotion or merit increment being evaluated by the Faculty
Personnel
Committee shall be deemed to have resigned from the committee.
5.55.17 In the event that replacements are needed, the Dean/University Librarian or in the case of the Francophone
Faculty Personnel
Committee, the Vice-President, Academic and
Provost and an appointee of the Union’s
Board shall (subject to Articles 5.55.3 to
5.55.8 above) seek a mutually acceptable tenured candidate who shall be named to serve.
5.55.18 An applicant may ask that a Faculty Personnel
Committee Member recuse herself/himself in her/his particular case, on the grounds that a conflict of interest exists, or
that a reasonable
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 120

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 apprehension of bias exists. The applicant shall state the reasons in writing to the Chair
of the Committee. The Chair shall render a decision with reasons to the applicant and the
Member in question if the Member is to be recused. Even without a request from the applicant, the Chair of the Faculty
Personnel
Committee may require a Member to recuse herself/himself on one (1) of the same two (2) grounds. A Member may
recuse herself/himself on her/his own volition.
5.55.19 In the context of collegial decision making, prior service in the same Department/School, joint service on
University or Union committees or other normal acquaintance by itself does not necessarily constitute grounds for the
presumption of conflict of interest or bias.
5.55.20 A quorum shall consist of the full committee including the two Members identified in Article
5.55.5, if applicable. The alternate may replace any elected Member when needed to obtain quorum.
5.55.21 The alternate Member shall act in the absence of a regular Member in order to obtain quorum. A regular Member
who is unable to attend meetings shall so inform the Chair.
The Chair shall formally invite the alternate to replace the regular Member. The alternate
Member shall be kept informed of Committee proceedings and shall be invited to attend all meetings. The alternate
Member has an obligation to stay abreast of the matters discussed.
5.55.22 Once a Faculty Personnel Committee has started to review a case, it shall be the responsibility of that Faculty
Personnel
Committee to see that case through to completion even if the process extends beyond one (1) academic year. In the
event that replacements are needed, the
Dean/University Librarian and an appointee of the Union’s Board shall (subject to Articles
5.55.3 to 5.55.8 above) seek a mutually acceptable tenured Member(s) who shall be named to serve.
Operating, Voting, Recording and Reporting
Procedures
5.55.23 The Chairs of Faculty Personnel Committee shall ensure that at the commencement of evaluations for renewal,
tenure, promotion and merit increment all Members of the
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 121

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Committee are familiar with the employment equity policies and the criteria of assessment set out in this Collective
Agreement.
5.55.24 Before endorsing or refusing to endorse an assessment of an application, the Faculty
Personnel Committee shall take into account the following evidence:
(a) The assessments by the Members of the Department(s)/School(s) and by the Dean/University Librarian.
(b) Any relevant material specified in the applicant's letter of application or curriculum vitae. The applicant shall be
responsible within reason for producing one true copy of any material that she/he wishes to be considered.
(c) The written representations submitted by the applicant.
5.55.25 Endorsements or refusal of endorsements by the Faculty Personnel Committee shall be established by majority
vote. There shall be no abstentions. Each Member shall record her/his vote with reasons on an assessment review form
as per Appendices K-Q– Faculty
Personnel Committee Assessment Review
Form.
5.55.26 The Chair shall prepare a letter reflecting the substantive and comprehensive reasons for the endorsements or
refusal of endorsements contained in the assessment review forms.
Where appropriate, the letter must include minority and majority views. The letter shall record the vote and contain the
following paragraph: "The Member may make written representations to the Vice-President,
Academic and Provost within ten (10) working days of the date on which the Faculty
Personnel Committee forwards to the Member a copy of the letter to the Vice-President,
Academic and Provost." A copy of the letter shall be forwarded to the applicant. Prior to sending the letter to the
Vice-President,
Academic and Provost, the letter shall be brought to Faculty Personnel Committee for review and approval.
5.55.27 The letter and the assessment review forms shall be retained by the Office of Academic
Staff Relations until all procedures up to and including arbitration have been exhausted.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 122

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Deadlines
5.55.28 In the event that an Faculty Personnel
Committee is unable to meet any of the deadlines set out in this Collective Agreement by virtue of its inability to meet with
quorum, then all subsequent deadlines in the particular procedure are extended by the length of time that Faculty
Personnel Committee requires to meet with quorum and make its endorsement or refusal of endorsement of the
assessment.
5.55.29 Notwithstanding Article 5.55.28 above, the
Member shall be guaranteed employment for the next academic year, as per Article 5.50 –
Assessment of a Member’s Performance, if the decision of the Vice-President, Academic and Provost on renewal and
tenure applications is not communicated to the
Member by March 1.
ARTICLE 5.60 – TENURE EVALUATION
PROCEDURES
5.60.1 In the interest of the University community and of society at large tenure protects free criticism and independent
judgement and hence forms an integral part of Academic
Freedom per Article 3.10 – Academic
Freedom.
5.60.2 Tenure means permanency of appointment.
Such an appointment may be terminated through resignation, retirement, dismissal for cause as established by a proper
hearing, redundancy or financial exigency consistent with the terms of this Collective Agreement, or as otherwise stated in
this Collective
Agreement. Tenure includes the right during appointment to academic freedom and to fair consideration for increases in
responsibility and salary, and promotions in rank.
5.60.3 Members on probationary appointments shall normally begin to undergo a formal tenure evaluation no later than
July 2 of the final year of their probationary status. However,
Members may apply for tenure one (1) year prior to the final year of their probationary status. An early application for
tenure may not result in a termination of appointment.
Members considered for tenure at the end of the normal probationary period may be awarded tenure, denied tenure, or if
the
Member has not made an early application for tenure, may have her/his probationary period extended by one (1)
additional year, during which she/he shall be evaluated for tenure for
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 123

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 a final time. A Member may not be considered for tenure more than twice.
5.60.4 However, in recognition of the fact that
Members may have to deal with heavier than normal personal responsibilities or extraordinary circumstances, not faced
by the majority of other Members, the opportunity is provided for a Member to request a delay of up to two (2) years in the
tenure review process. Members wishing to delay their final tenure evaluation must apply in writing to the appropriate
Dean/University Librarian by May
1 of the final year of their probationary appointment describing the special circumstances why a delay in tenure review is
requested, identifying the particular area in the performance of the Member that would be strengthened by the delay and
what steps the
Member will take to meet the requirements for tenure during the period of the delay. The
Dean/University Librarian, after discussion with the appropriate Department(s)/School(s) will forward a recommendation to
the Vice-
President, Academic and Provost who will render a decision by June 1. The Vice-
President, Academic and Provost may authorise a delay in tenure evaluation for up to two (2) years. If the Vice-President,
Academic and Provost does not authorise a delay in tenure evaluation, the evaluation will proceed.
Failure by the Vice-President, Academic and
Provost to authorise a delay in tenure evaluation shall not be subject to grievance and arbitration.
5.60.5 Members who have taken pregnancy, parental or adoption leave as provided under Article
7.60 – Pregnancy, Parental and Adoption
Leaves during their probationary period may elect to postpone the mandated evaluations leading to tenure (both the
evaluation for renewal of the probationary appointment and the final tenure evaluation) by one (1) year for each incident of
leave period.
Assessment of Teaching Faculty
5.60.6 When an assessment of a Member’s performance is undertaken, those making an assessment or being asked to
endorse an assessment, shall use the following standards:
(a) A record of satisfactory teaching in the pre-tenure years based on the teaching dossier and approved course
evaluations as set out in Article 5.15 –
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 124

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of
Academics and Article 5.50.3 of Article
5.50 – Assessment of a Member’s
Performance. The nature and scope of past teaching activities shall be taken into account in assessing a Member. If the
applicant has faced problems in teaching, the assessors will look for evidence that the applicant has recognized the
problems, has taken steps to improve, and has made some improvements.
(b) A record of satisfactory scholarly activity as defined in Article 5.15 –
Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of
Academics. The applicant shall show progress in independent scholarly or creative activity.
(c) A record of contributions to University governance and administrative duties as set out in Article 5.15 – Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of
Academics.
(d) The applicant has met the formal educational or professional qualifications for the rank of Assistant
Professor and bilingualism qualifications as set out in Article 5.10
– Academic Qualifications Guidelines,
Article 3.30.5 of Article 3.30 –
Bilingualism and Letter of Appointment, consistent with the Collective
Agreement.
(e) The assessors shall be flexible in assessing stronger performance in some areas against weaker performance in other
areas as set out in Article 5.50.4 of Article 5.50 –
Assessment of a Member’s
Performance. However, in no instance shall it recommend tenure for an applicant if teaching performance is judged
mostly unsatisfactory or if the applicant is not engaged in a program of scholarly activity.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 125

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Assessment of Librarians and Archivists
5.60.7 When an assessment of a Member’s performance is undertaken, those making an assessment or being asked to
endorse an assessment, shall use the following standards:
(a) A record of satisfactory professional librarianship/archives management in the pre-tenure years based on the
academic dossier as set out in Article
5.15 – Rights, Responsibilities and
Duties of Academics and Article 5.50 –
Assessment of a Member’s
Performance. If the applicant has faced problems in professional librarianship/archives management, the assessors will
look for evidence that the applicant has recognized the problems, has taken steps to improve, and has made some
improvements.
(b) A record of satisfactory scholarly activity as defined in Article 5.15 –
Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of
Academics. The applicant shall show progress in independent research or creative activity.
(c) A record of contributions to University governance and administrative duties as set out in Article 5.15 – Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of
Academics.
(d) The applicant has met the formal educational/professional/linguistic qualifications for the rank of Assistant
Librarian or Assistant Archivist and bilingualism qualifications as set out in
Article 5.10 – Academic Qualifications
Guidelines, Article 3.30.5 of Article
3.30 – Bilingualism and Letter of
Appointment, consistent with the
Collective Agreement.
(e) The assessors shall be flexible in assessing stronger performance in some areas against weaker
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 126

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 performance in other areas as set out in Article 5.50.4 of Article 5.50 –
Assessment of a Member’s
Performance. However, in no instance shall it recommend tenure for an applicant if the applicant’s performance in
professional librarianship/archives management is judged mostly unsatisfactory or if the applicant is not engaged in a
program of scholarly activity.
ARTICLE 5.65 – PROMOTION PROCEDURES
5.65.1 The term "promotion" applies to advancement from the rank of Lecturer to Assistant
Professor, Assistant Professor to Associate
Professor and Associate Professor to Full
Professor, or to corresponding advancement for the Librarians/Archivists from the rank of:
(a) General Librarian/Archivists to
Assistant Librarian/Archivists,
(b) Assistant Librarian/Archivists to
Associate Librarian/Archivists; and
(c) Associate Librarian/Archivists to Full
Librarian/Archivists.
5.65.2 A Member is eligible to apply for promotion while on leave, but the Member is responsible for maintaining contact
with the University and for all expenses incurred in making appearances when requested.
5.65.3 Members shall normally apply for their own promotion. Applications may also be submitted by Chairs/Directors, or
a
Dean/University Librarian on behalf of
Members who have not themselves applied where the Members have declared their willingness to be considered.
5.65.4 Applications shall be made on the prescribed application form and forwarded in paper and electronic form to the
office of the applicant's
Dean/University Librarian, together with a paper copy of all necessary and relevant documentation.
5.65.5 The application for promotion shall reach the
Dean/University Librarian not later than July 2, for decision in that academic year. Members are urged to consult with the
Dean/University
Librarian well in advance of the application deadline. If the Member so requests by June
1, the Dean/University Librarian will prepare a preliminary written assessment based on the
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 127

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 requirements set out in the appropriate
Articles of Article 5.10 – Academic
Qualifications Guidelines within one (1) week of receiving the Member’s application. A copy of this assessment will
immediately be forwarded to the Member who will then have one (1) week to decide whether or not to proceed with the
application.
5.65.6 The following documents must be attached to the application for promotion and must be submitted at the time of
application:
(a) An updated curriculum vitae of the applicant.
(b) For applications for promotion to Full
Professor/Librarian:
(i) A list of at least three (3) referees, of which two (2) will be chosen, from outside the
University qualified to assess the research and creative works of the applicant.
(ii) A copy of the research and creative works the applicant wishes to have considered in the examination of the
application, it being understood that the applicant may attach a clear and detailed description of these works when the
works are such that their physical submission is not practical.
Barring unusual circumstances, it is assumed that all research and creative works submitted by the applicant will be made
available to the external referees for review.
5.65.7 In making recommendations in promotion cases, the assessment procedure in Article
5.50 – Assessment of a Member’s
Performance is to be followed.
Recommendations of the Assessors
5.65.8 For appointment/promotion to the rank of Full
Professor/Librarian, the assessors shall consider the assessment of the Member's scholarly activity as judged by four (4)
external referees. Two (2) of these referees will be nominated by the applicant if the applicant so requests. Should the
applicant fail to
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 128

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 nominate one (1) or both external referees, the Member’s Department/School will
nominate the required referees. The additional external referees shall be appointed by the Vice-President, Academic and
Provost after consultation with the Department/School.
All external evaluations shall come to the assessors duly signed by the author.
5.65.9 In the case of Members at the rank of
Lecturer/General Librarian/Archivists who are awarded a Doctoral degree, they shall be promoted to the rank of Assistant
Professor/Librarian effective January 1 or July
1 whichever next follows the award of the degree. The Doctorate will be deemed to have been received when the
individual can provide a diploma or a letter from the university where the Doctorate is being obtained indicating that all the
conditions for the Doctorate, including the thesis defence and the corrections to the thesis, have been met. Members must
supply a copy of the diploma or of the letter to their
Dean/University Librarian with a normal application form as well as an updated curriculum vitae before the promotion
procedures will be initiated. In the case of librarians, Members must also demonstrate that they are holders of a Master's
degree in
Library Science if their Doctorate is not in
Library Science.
ARTICLE 5.70 – PERSONNEL FILES
5.70.1 Official personnel files of a Member shall be kept by the appropriate Dean/University
Librarian, with copy in the office of the Vice-
President, Academic and Provost. The
Employer agrees not to use any unofficial personnel information that is not maintained in accordance with this Article for
any official purposes including disciplinary measures.
There shall be two (2) types of files for
Members, active files and archival files. Active files shall contain only information allowed under this Article. Archival files
shall contain material which has been banned for use in subsequent proceedings as in Articles
5.70.5 to 5.70.9 below but which the
University requires for matters other than those related to this Collective Agreement.
5.70.2 Members shall have the right to examine all of their personnel files during normal business hours, after notice in
writing, in the presence
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 129

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 of the Dean/University Librarian or a person authorised by the Dean/University
Librarian. Material in the files which is to be held confidential according to the provisions of this Collective Agreement will
be removed from the files prior to their inspection by the
Member. However, an inventory of this confidential material, certified by the
Dean/University Librarian, will be provided to the Member, such inventory shall identify all confidential documents by
authorship (if appropriate), date and general subject matter only.
5.70.3 Members may request the Vice-President,
Academic and Provost to provide one (1) copy of their personnel file, excluding confidential material according to the
provisions of this
Collective Agreement but including the inventory thereof. Such requests will be filled within five (5) working days, at no
charge to the Member. One (1) copy of additions made subsequent to the initial copying may be requested under the
same conditions and terms. Requests for additional copies will be filled at the convenience of the Vice-President,
Academic and Provost.
5.70.4 No anonymous material concerning any
Member shall be kept by the Employer for inclusion in the Member's personnel file. Statistical summaries of student
evaluations or written summaries of student comments unrelated to Senate sanctioned course evaluations, such
summaries to exclude anonymous comments, shall neither be considered anonymous nor confidential and shall remain
available when required by this Collective Agreement.
Officers of the Employer, including
Deans/University Librarian, reserve the right to maintain personal notes and records for their own use.
Records pejorative of a Member not included in her/his personnel file will not be passed on to other Officers of the
Employer.
5.70.5 Members shall have the right to have all of their files supplemented or corrected in the event of error, or
inadequacy. In the event of alleged distortion, Members shall have the right to provide additional material for inclusion in
their personnel files. Members shall have the right to request the removal from their personnel file of any false, irrelevant
or unsubstantiated material. Such requests shall be made through the Dean/University
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 130

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Librarian as appropriate and must be accompanied with reasons why the material is false, irrelevant or unsubstantiated. In
the event of refusal by the Dean/University
Librarian of such a request, the
Dean/University Librarian shall provide the
Member with reasons why the material is true, relevant or substantiated, and shall send a copy of that response to the
Union. Members can grieve according to the provisions of this
Collective Agreement, providing only that such grievance is initiated within forty-five (45) working days of notification by
the Employer to the Members that the material in dispute is to be included in their personnel file.
5.70.6 Letters of assessments received in relation to the appointment of a Member shall be confidential and shall not be
submitted as evidence in any subsequent proceedings against that Member.
5.70.7 Letters of reprimand are inadmissible evidence if used against a Member for any purpose when no further
disciplinary measures have been imposed on the Member for two (2) subsequent academic years. In advance of any
proceedings involving the
Member, the Dean/University Librarian shall remove such letters from the Member's personnel file and place them in a
University depository. The Member shall be notified that this has been done.
5.70.8 All letters or assessments solicited by the
Faculty Personnel Committee and any summaries thereof shall be kept confidential and used only for the purposes for
which they were solicited in any subsequent proceedings against that Member.
5.70.9 Student evaluations, in numerical or written form, shall not be admissible as evidence in any process involving a
Member's tenure, promotion or dismissal if such evaluations are more than five (5) years old.
5.70.10 A full copy of a Member's file, including all letters of reference and assessments except those excluded by the
provisions of this
Collective Agreement, shall be made available to the Faculty Personnel Committee and the
Vice-President, Academic and Provost at their request for the purpose of promotion and tenure evaluation. Such
committees will treat the file as confidential.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 131

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
5.70.11 When confidential information is to be used by the Employer in the course of proceedings to resolve a grievance,
the detailed substance of such confidential information shall be made available at least one (1) week in advance of the
hearing to Members or their duly authorised representative in a form which does not identify the author. For arbitration,
reasonable efforts will be made to supply the information as soon as practicable, subject to the above.
5.70.12 Where in the opinion of an arbitrator the identity of the author is central to the resolution of the difference, the
arbitrator shall be supplied with the information and may make use of it as essential to her/his decision while maintaining
the confidentiality thereof.
5.70.13 The Employer agrees not to release any individually identifiable information concerning a Member or Members
without the written consent of the Member(s), except as provided for in Article 2.50 – Information.
5.70.14 In the case of an appeal against dismissal, the contents of the official personnel file shall be made available to the
Member as a true copy if and when the formal grievance procedure has been initiated using the same protection of
confidentiality as stated in Article 5.70.11 above.
ARTICLE 5.75 – DISCIPLINE
5.75.1 Discipline of Members including dismissal shall be only for cause. Discipline shall be just and reasonable, based on
the principle of progressive discipline, except in egregious cases.
5.75.2 Just cause shall be defined as:
(a) Gross misconduct including serious unprofessional behaviour and/or misconduct constituting a grave and direct
violation of the personal safety of another Member; Members of the
University community and/or students of the University community.
(b) Persistent failure to discharge academic responsibility as defined in this Collective Agreement either through
incompetence or neglect of
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 132

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 duty to students or scholarly professional pursuits.
5.75.3 Just cause must be interpreted in the context of a University environment including the principles of tenure where
applicable.
5.75.4 Discipline shall be imposed only in compliance with principles of natural justice and due process. Accordingly, the
Member has a fundamental right to know, in a timely manner, the nature of the allegations against him/her, and the right
to respond to such allegations.
5.75.5 The following are the only forms of discipline which may be taken by the Employer against a Member:
(a) A letter of reprimand, specifying the grounds and adding this reprimand to the personnel file;
(b) The suspension with pay; if and only if the Vice-President, Academic and
Provost cites the suspension with pay as a disciplinary measure. It is understood that where a suspension with pay is
non-disciplinary such suspension shall not be referenced as disciplinary in any subsequent disciplinary actions;
(c) The suspension without pay; the reduction in pay shall be computed as one two hundred and sixtieth (1/260) of normal
salary per day of suspension;
(d) The withholding of an annual increment;
(e) Dismissal of a Member.
5.75.6 When the Employer becomes aware of a matter that may lead to the imposition of discipline under this Article,
including investigations triggered by a formal complaint pursuant to a discrimination and harassment policy, the Employer
shall commence an investigation within twenty (20) working days.
Except in circumstances where to do so would compromise the integrity of the investigation, the Member and the Union
shall be notified in writing of the nature of the allegation(s) upon commencement of the investigation.
The investigation shall be completed within forty (40) working days of its commencement.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 133

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Prior to completing the investigation, the
Employer shall schedule a meeting with the
Member and his/her Union representative.
The Member and her/his Union representative shall be given five (5) working days’ notice of the time and place of the
meeting wherever possible or practicable. The Employer shall also provide with the notice of meeting full particulars of the
allegation(s) against the
Member, including the name(s) of any complainant(s). At the meeting the Employer shall provide the Member with the
opportunity to respond to these allegations.
5.75.7 When contemplating disciplining a Member following an investigation the Vice-President,
Academic and Provost shall meet with the
Member and his/her Union representative within 20 working days of the conclusion of the investigation to review the
matter with the
Member.
The Member and her/his Union representative shall be given five (5) working days’ notice of the time and place of the
meeting wherever possible or practicable along with a summary of the factual findings of the investigation.
The Vice President, Academic and Provost shall consider the representation of the
Member and Union prior to the imposition of discipline.
5.75.8 Within five (5) working days of the meeting the
Vice President, Academic and Provost shall notify the Member and Union in writing as to whether discipline shall be
imposed, the nature of the disciplinary action, the reasons for it and the events being relied upon to support it.
5.75.9 All timelines in this Article can be extended by consent of the parties. The consent of either party shall not be
unreasonably withheld.
Non-compliance with this Article will not result in discipline being automatically void. The effect of any prejudice to a
Member as a result of non-compliance may be considered by an
Arbitrator.
5.75.10 Cases involving non-culpable behaviour by a
Member as a result of a physical or mental illness shall be treated separately from cases for disciplinary conduct and shall
be dealt with in accordance with the Ontario Human Rights
Code.
5.75.11 Grievances regarding disciplinary measures
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 134

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 against Sessional Members shall be dealt with by the procedures in Article 4.40.7 of
Article
4.40 – Withdrawal of Seniority for Sessional
Members.
5.75.12 Any record of discipline shall be removed from a Member’s personnel file after a period of twenty-four (24) months
from the date of the alleged infraction provided that no subsequent infractions of a similar nature have occurred within that
period.
5.75.13 Letters of counselling are non-disciplinary letters. Letters of counselling may not be used to support or justify
discipline, or a more serious form of discipline, except that letters of counselling may be used to refute a Member’s claim
that he/she was not aware of the wrongdoing giving rise to the discipline. The letters shall set out clear expectations from
the Employer referencing the collective agreement. Every letter of counselling shall include the following statement: “This
letter is not disciplinary in nature and does not attribute guilt.” Letters of counselling are not a pre-requisite to discipline.
ARTICLE 5.85 – RESIGNATION
5.85.1 Normally a Member may resign effective June
30 or December 30, with at least three (3) month's written notice to the Vice-President,
Academic and Provost. All leaves to which a resigning Member would be entitled must be terminated at that date.
5.85.2 Employment may be terminated at any time by mutual written agreement between a
Member and the Vice-President, Academic and Provost.
5.85.3 Faculty Members on a leave of absence at another university shall be deemed to have resigned six (6) months
after they receive tenure at that institution.
ARTICLE 5.90 – RETIREMENT
5.90.1 Normal Retirement Date
For the purpose of the administration of the pension plan, the normal retirement date of a
Member shall be the first (1st) day of July next following the attainment of age sixty-five (65), unless the Member's
sixty-fifth (65th) birthday
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 135

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 falls on the first (1st) day of July, in which case the Normal Retirement Date shall
coincide with the Member's sixty-fifth (65th) birthday.
However, in accordance with government statutes, retirement is not mandatory at that time.
5.90.2 Optional Retirement Dates
(a) Early Retirement
Early retirement shall be governed by the regulations of the Laurentian University
Pension Plan.
(b) Retirement at Dates Other than July 1
Subject to 5.90.2 (a) above and in exceptional circumstances a Member may request and the
Pension Committee may approve the request, retirement, at a date other than July 1. In this instance, an annuity shall be
purchased as of the next date the Employer will have available to it the evaluation of the total fund as of the day preceding
- that is, October 1, January 1, and April 1.
If such a request is made approved and implemented, only that Member's share of the net growth of the fund to the day
preceding will be allocated.
5.90.3 Members retired from this University shall retain:
(a) The right to their title and the listing of their name and their title in a special section at the back of the University
Calendar, until the death of the
Member.
(b) The same library privileges as full-time
Members, free parking in facilities available to full-time Members, and such other University facilities as may be granted
by the Vice-President,
Academic and Provost at her/his discretion.
(c) The same exemption from tuition fees for themselves, their spouse, and their dependants as full-time Members, as per
Article 8.50 – Tuition Fee
Exemption and Spousal Library Card.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 136

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
(d) The same eligibility for free Physical
Education Centre membership for themselves, their spouses and their dependants as full-time Members, as per Article
8.60 – Physical Education
Facilities.
5.90.4 To honour an outstanding contribution in an academic field, the Employer may, in accordance with Senate policy,
bestow the title of Professor/Librarian Emeritus upon a retiring Member.
5.90.5 Members hired after September 24, 2017, and who are age 55 or older upon retirement or resignation, will not
have the option to commute the value of their pension benefit upon retirement or resignation. The Pension
Plan will be amended to reflect this agreement.
RESEARCH, CREATIVITY AND PROFESSIONAL
DEVELOPMENT
ARTICLE 6.10 – RESEARCH AND CREATIVITY
6.10.1 The Parties recognize that the common good of society depends upon the unfettered search for knowledge in all
fields of study and upon its free exposition. The Parties further acknowledge the importance of research and creativity and
the Employer will make every reasonable effort to support both in a fair and equitable manner.
6.10.2 The University is an open environment for the pursuit of scholarly work. Academic freedom and critical inquiry
depend on the communication of the findings and results of intellectual investigation. The Employer shall not interfere with
a Member’s freedom to publish the results of scholarly inquiry and research, except for limitations imposed by duly
constituted university Research Ethics
Boards.
ARTICLE 6.15 – OFFICE OF RESEARCH SERVICES
6.15.1 The Office of Research Services (ORS) shall facilitate research and creativity for all
Members in a fair and equitable manner. The work of the ORS such as providing the resources to assist all Members in
preparing grant applications, shall be done in a constructive manner to provide better access to funding and research
collaboration at the
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 137

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 national and international level, while promoting research activities and creativity at
Laurentian University.
6.15.2 For internally or externally-funded grant applications requesting a pre-selection or an evaluation, the Employer
shall communicate the composition and terms of reference of the selection committee on the ORS Office website. The
selection committee shall include
Faculty Members as elected by Senate If doing so does not prevent the application from going forward. None of the
Members of the selection committee shall be involved in the grant or contract applications being reviewed pursuant to
Article 3.35 – Conflict of Interest.
6.15.3 Members of the Administration shall not be involved as investigators in internal research grants and if they are
investigators in externally-funded grants that are internally pre-selected, they shall not be part of the selection committee
pursuant to Article 3.35 –
Conflict of Interest.
6.15.4 The Employer shall inform faculty Members of any external competitions requiring Employer matching funds, the
policies, selection criteria, and where possible, provide an estimation of the likelihood of success concerning such
competitions.
ARTICLE 6.20 – RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
SUPPORT
6.20.1 In order to attract and retain faculty Members, all new full-time Members with probationary or tenured appointments
shall receive a minimum Start-up Grant of eight thousand dollars ($8,000).
6.20.2 Recipients of these awards shall have three
(3) years to use the funds. After a three (3) year period, any unspent amount shall be returned to the Office of the
Vice-President,
Academic and Provost.
ARTICLE 6.25 – LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY
RESEARCH FUND (LURF)
6.25.1 For each of the years of the Collective
Agreement, the Employer shall provide to the
Vice-President, Research a research fund to
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 138

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 enhance scholarly productivity through an open competition among Members:
Research Support (LURF) as follows: one hundred and sixty thousand dollars
($160,000) per year.
In the event that faculty from federated or affiliated universities wish to apply, their applications shall only be considered if
their home institution has contributed to the LURF fund an amount per full-time Member equivalent to that provided by the
Employer.
6.25.2 For each of the years of the Collective
Agreement, the Employer will provide to the
Vice-President, Research an additional twenty thousand dollars ($20,000) per year to support both research activities and
attendance at academic and professional conferences by retired Members, Sessional Members and
Master Lecturers, through an open competition. The Employer will also provide active assistance to these Members
making grant applications to NSERC, SSHRC, and
CIHR.
6.25.3 A LURF Committee of eight (8) full-time
Members, two (2) from Arts, one (1) from
Education, one (1) from Health, two (2) from
Sciences, Engineering and Architecture, one
(1) from Management and one (1) Librarian will evaluate the proposals submitted to the
Office of Research Services once a year.
These Members will be appointed by the
Dean/University Librarian in consultation with the Union for a two (2) year term.
6.25.4 The LURF Committee shall establish its own procedures, and develop criteria for the administration of the funds.
These criteria shall be just, equitable and consistent with the objective of nurturing and stimulating research at Laurentian
University. The rules of this yearly competition shall be clearly established in consultation and agreement with the Union
and shall not be modified without the approval of the Union. The approved rules shall be treated as a public document and
posted on the ORS website. The funding criteria for
LURF shall not be limited to, or give priority to, salaries for assistants.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 139

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
6.25.5 While the LURF committee should determine the amount of funding for each competition, in no case shall that
amount of funding be greater than five thousand dollars ($5,000) per application. The total LURF funding shall be
allocated by Faculty/Library, proportionate to the numbers of full-time Members in each
Faculty/Library.
6.25.6 The University shall maintain records and deposit copies of all proceedings, statements and correspondence
related to the
Committee's policies and the awarding of grants. This material will be made available to the Union upon request, subject
to any limitations in the Freedom of Information and
Personal Privacy Act. Applicants who are not funded by LURF should be given an explanation by the LURF Committee on
the reasons of the rejection.
6.25.7 Applicants whose applications are rejected by the LURF committee shall have recourse to an appeals procedure
only in the case of allegations of violations of academic freedom, significant procedural irregularities or discrimination.
Notice of an appeal must be submitted to the Dean/University Librarian and
ORS no later than one (1) month after the applicant has been notified of the decision.
Within one (1) week of receiving notice of appeal, the ORS shall strike an Appeals
Committee. Members of the Appeals
Committee should be selected in light of research experience and expertise. The
Committee will consist of:
One (1) Member appointed by the Union;
One (1) Member appointed by the Vice-
President, Research; and a Chair chosen by the two (2) appointed Members.
6.25.8 The Appeals Committee shall establish its own procedures taking into account the provisions of this Article and the
published policies and procedures for grant applications of the LURF Committee. Should the appeal be upheld, the
appellant’s request will be funded if there are funds still available. If not, the appellant will be given first priority for funding
at the next competition.
6.25.9 The decision of the Appeals Committee shall be final and binding on all Parties. The
Appeals Committee shall communicate its decision and its reasons in writing to the appellant and the ORS within one (1)
month of hearing the appeal.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 140

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
6.25.10 A list of all awardees including the project title, the amount of funding and the duration of all projects shall be
published on the ORS website after each competition.
ARTICLE 6.30 – PATENTS
6.30.1 The Employer agrees that the Members have the unqualified right to publish their inventions. The Employer further
agrees that the Members have no obligation to modify their research to enhance patentability nor, unless otherwise
agreed, any obligation to seek patent protection for the results of their scientific work.
6.30.2 The Employer waives, disclaims and abandons any interest in or claims to any invention, improvement, design or
development made by a Member or Members except where this has occurred with the use of the Employer's funds,
personnel or equipment in which instance the conditions set out in
Article 6.30.4 hereof shall apply. Unless otherwise provided in this Article, any invention or any patent arising therefrom
shall be the sole property of the inventor.
6.30.3 The Members shall have the right to make their own arrangements at their own expense to patent an invention
subject to the obligations in this Article and shall be entitled to all the proceeds therefrom except where the invention was
made with the use of the
Employer's funds, personnel or equipment.
6.30.4 Where an invention, improvement, design or development was made by Members with the use of the Employer's
funds, personnel or equipment the Members shall sign an agreement with the University before an application for patent is
filed by them. This agreement shall provide that the Employer shall assign all rights, title and interest in the invention,
improvement, design or development to the Members, subject to the
University and the Members sharing equally in the "net proceeds" as used in this Article shall mean the net profits derived
from licensing or commercialisation of the patented product, equipment or process after deduction of all expenses
incurred in patent searches, for obtained patent protection and for maintaining said protection in Canada and in other
countries.
6.30.5 Members agree to disclose the existence of any patent applications to the Employer within three (3) months of the
date of the application
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 141

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 unless otherwise provided for in this Article and shall affirm in writing at that time
whether or not the discovery has been made and developed with the use of Employer's funds, personnel or equipment.
The Employer may within one (1) month of receipt of the statement of the Member challenge in writing the assertion of the
Member in regard to the circumstances of the discovery, in which case the matter shall be settled by arbitration as
detailed in Article 11.15 – Arbitration
Procedure. Any challenge by the Employer shall be null and void unless received within the above noted time limit. If the
Member(s) fails to disclose the existence of patent applications within three (3) months, it shall be understood that the
Employer maintains its rights under this Article until such disclosure is made. Failure by the Employer to challenge the
assertion of the Member within one (1) month shall constitute a waiver of any rights that the Employer may have had in
such discovery.
6.30.6 For the purpose of interpreting Articles 6.30.2 to 6.30.5 above, payment of regular salary and benefits shall not be
construed as use of the Employer's funds.
6.30.7 Members shall grant to the Employer a non- exclusive, royalty free, irrevocable, indivisible, and non-transferable
right to use solely for the
University 's internal use any patented device, equipment or process when such device, equipment or process has been
invented with the use of the Employer's equipment, funds or support/technical personnel. Such right, however, shall not
include the right to transfer or exploit any product or process.
6.30.8 Where Members decide that they will not patent, produce or market an invention, improvement or discovery at their
own expense but consent to the University patenting, producing or marketing the invention, before an application for
patent is filed by the University, the University shall negotiate an agreement with the
Members. The agreement shall provide that the Members shall assign all their rights, titles and interests in the invention,
improvement or discovery to the University subject to the
University and the Members sharing equally in the "net proceeds" derived therefrom.
6.30.9 Without mutual agreement, the name of the
University shall not be used in connection with inventions in which the Employer has no interest.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 142

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
6.30.10 Any revenue that the Employer may receive from inventions shall be dedicated to academic development and
research with at least fifty percent (50%) of such income designated for academic development and research in the
Faculty/Library with which the inventor is affiliated. These funds shall be maintained in a special account, which shall be
open to the inspection of the President of the Union or the President of the Union's designate.
6.30.11 The Employer agrees that it shall not enter any agreement to sub-contract work or responsibilities already
undertaken or possessed by the Employer and the Members without securing to the Members who may be seconded to
or be employed by the sub- contractor all the rights, privileges and benefits accorded to them in this patent Article of this
Collective Agreement. Nor shall the
Employer enter into any agreement to create a consortia of universities or government departments or private companies
for the purposes of research or development or commercial exploitation without securing to the Members who may be
seconded to or employed by such consortia, departments or private companies all the rights, privileges and benefits
accorded by this Article. If the
Employer makes an agreement contrary to this provision and fails to secure the said rights, privileges and benefits to said
Members, the agreement shall not apply to
Members unless there is a special agreement in writing between the Employer and the
Union to waive this clause of the Article.
ARTICLE 6.35 – COPYRIGHT
Copyright vested in the Member:
6.35.1 The Member who is the creator of any work including any printed material, computer programmes, on-line course
material, painting, sculpture, film, slide, tape or similar material shall retain the copyright therein unless otherwise stated in
this Article.
Copyright vested in the University:
6.35.2 The Parties agree that the University shall hold copyright to any work including any creative work, printed material,
computer programme, on-line course material, films, slides, tapes or similar materials produced by
Members as part of their normal workload for the University for use in its distance education courses. In all cases, the
University shall arrange for the development of these courses
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 143

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 through a special contract with the Members, which sets out terms in accordance with
the terms in this Collective Agreement. Copies of all works subject to the policy stated in this
Article shall contain a statement or marking identifying the ownership of copyright, and with appropriate credit, the
contributors. A copy of the contract between the Member and the University shall be sent to the Union.
6.35.3 If the University requests a work including a creative work, printed material, films, slides, tapes, computer
programmes, on-line course material, or similar materials from a Member under special contract, then, in the absence of
any agreement to the contrary, the University shall be the first owner of the copyright therein. This includes all materials
for distance education courses. A Member entering into such a contract with the
University shall be notified of the terms of this
Article prior to signing the contract. The Union shall receive a copy of such notification.
6.35.4 All special contracts for distance education courses shall contain an Article which allows the contributors to use (for
their own classroom purposes) parts of any course that they have created provided that they shall not use such material in
another distance education course without the written permission of the University during the period in which the
University holds copyright to that material.
6.35.5 The master copy of any work whose copyright is vested in the University under the terms of this Article shall be the
property of the
University. The University shall be responsible for the custody and control of such works and of any copies thereof.
6.35.6 Where consent, fees or licenses are required for the use of incorporated materials in works in which the University
has copyright under the terms of this Article, the contributor shall notify the University by provision of a list of works which
require such clearance. The
University shall have the right to refuse to accept requests for copyright clearance, which are judged to be prohibitively
expensive.
6.35.7 The Members who are the authors of any work, whose copyright is vested in the
University shall sign a warranty that the work is original and that, to the best of their
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 144

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 knowledge, it does not violate any existing copyright.
6.35.8 The offering of courses to which the University has copyright under the terms of this Article shall be at the
University's discretion.
Revision:
6.35.9 From time to time, the University may require revisions in works to which it holds the copyright in order to ensure
that proper and current academic standards are met.
6.35.10 Further, the author of work as defined in
Articles 6.35.2 or 6.35.3 above may, at any time after three (3) years of use, and at three
(3) year intervals thereafter notify the
University of the need to revise such a work. The University and the Member shall negotiate the amount it will pay to
defray the costs of such revisions including the Member's fee.
6.35.11 The process of revision shall be regarded as the joint responsibility of the author of the work and the University. If
the author chooses not to undertake the revision or if the author has not accepted the University's request for revision
within one (1) month of receipt of that request or if the author is no longer an
Employee of the University, then the
Department/School shall choose an individual to make the required revisions. By so doing, the author shall not lose
contractual rights to any fees. Where the author is no longer an
Employee of the University, notice of the intention to revise and of the proposed revisions shall be sent to her/him by
registered mail at the last known address. In the event that the author and the University cannot agree on the nature or
extent of the revisions, the University may engage the services of someone approved by the
Department/School to make the revisions.
6.35.12 The University shall negotiate a fee for any revisions that are made at the University's request.
6.35.13 In all cases where someone other than the authors make revisions to the work, if the authors object to the extent
or the propriety of the revisions, they may have their names withdrawn as contributors to the work and any visible
indication that they are contributors to the work shall be withdrawn. The authors must notify the University of their desire
to do
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 145

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 so within one (1) month after receiving notice by registered mail of the proposed
revisions.
Third Party use:
6.35.14 "Net proceeds" of any fees or royalties that the University receives for the use by another
Party of a work to which the University has copyright under the terms of this Article shall be distributed in accordance with
Article
6.35.15 hereof and the Member shall receive no additional payment. "Net Proceeds" shall mean the fees and royalties
received less the cost of reproduction, administration and distribution.
6.35.15 Net proceeds shall be distributed as follows:
(a) Until the original production costs have been recouped by the University, seventy-five percent (75%) to the
University and twenty-five percent
(25%) to the author.
(b) After recovery of the original production costs, fifty percent (50%) to the University and fifty percent (50%) to the
author.
"Original production costs" include the normal tariff charges to produce the physical work including licensing costs of other
copyright material exploited in the work. An accounting of production costs shall be produced by the
University if requested by the Member or by the Union.
Member's Copy:
6.35.16 If practicable the Members shall receive, upon request, a copy at a cost not exceeding the cost of the
tape/film/recording or other medium upon which the work has been produced of any work produced by them for the
University and to which the University holds copyright under the terms of this
Collective Agreement.
6.35.17 Should the University wish to erase or otherwise destroy part or all of a work to which it has copyright under the
terms of this
Collective Agreement, the authors shall be given notice of such intention and shall have one (1) month in which to make
known their wish to receive a copy of the section (s) to be erased. If the authors express such a wish
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 146

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 within the time limit, they shall receive a copy of those sections at a cost not exceeding
the cost of the tape/film/recording or other medium upon which the work has been produced plus reasonable
administrative costs arising therefrom.
ARTICLE 6.40 – COMMITTEE ON PATENTS AND
COPYRIGHT
6.40.1 The Parties agree to create a continuing
Committee on Patents and Copyright, which shall be composed of two (2) individuals appointed by the Employer and two
(2)
Members appointed by the Union, with the
Chairship alternating between the Employer's representatives and the Union's representatives at each successive
meeting.
6.40.2 The Committee shall meet at least twice annually to:
(a) Conduct such business as is referred to it.
(b) Consider strategies for marketing inventions, improvements or discoveries.
(c) Recommend to the Joint Committee on the Administration of the Collective
Agreement any proposals for modifications or changes in the patents and copyright Articles of this Collective
Agreement. The Parties agree to consider these recommendations during Collective Bargaining.
(d) Mediate any disputes arising out of
Article 6.30 – Patents and Article 6.35
– Copyright in accordance with Article
6.40.3 below.
6.40.3 Grievance and Arbitration
For the purposes of this Collective Agreement, any grievance by a Member pertaining to
Article 6.30 – Patents and/or Article 6.35 –
Copyright shall be handled in accordance with the following procedure:
(a) The Member, within three (3) weeks of the event giving rise to the grievance or the date on which the Member knew or
reasonably should have known of such event if that date is later, shall present a grievance to the Vice-
President, Academic and Provost.
(b) Within two (2) weeks of receipt of the
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 147

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 grievance, the Vice-President,
Academic and Provost shall refer the matter to the continuing Committee on
Patents and Copyright and inform the
Union of such grievance. If the Vice-
President, Academic and Provost fails to refer the matter to the continuing
Committee on Patents and Copyright within the time limits, the Members shall be deemed to have succeeded in their
grievance and the results thereof shall be binding on the university.
(c) The continuing Committee on Patents and Copyright, within one (1) month of the receipt of the grievance, shall make a
recommendation for the resolution of the grievance. The time limits may be extended by mutual agreement. If the
committee fails to make a recommendation within the time limits, the Vice-President, Academic and
Provost may act as in Article 6.40.3 (d) below.
(d) The Vice-President, Academic and
Provost within one (1) week of the receipt of the recommendations of the continuing Committee on Patents and
Copyright or within one (1) week of the end of the time limits for action by the
Committee shall render the
Committee's proposal in the matter and communicate it in writing to the Parties concerned.
(e) If the proposal of the Vice-President,
Academic and Provost rendered pursuant to Article 6.40.3 (d) above does not resolve the grievance, the matter may be
submitted to binding arbitration by one (1) arbitrator in accordance with the grievance and arbitration procedures of this
Collective
Agreement.
ARTICLE 6.45 – PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
EXPENDITURES
6.45.1 In order to further the objectives of the
University, the creation and dissemination of knowledge, the activities of each full-time
Member shall be supported by professional expenditures in each contractual year. The amount of these expenditures
shall be limited to two thousand four hundred and fifty dollars
($2,450).
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 148

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
6.45.2 Professional development expenditures allowable under this Article include the following:
(a) Membership fees for professional and/or learned societies related to the
Member’s discipline.
(b) Subscriptions to professional and/or learned journals.
(c) Books, materials, equipment, and services directly related to research and teaching/professional Library work.
(d) Registration fees for the Member to attend a scholarly conference.
(e) Travel including transportation, food and accommodation for the Member to attend relevant scholarly conferences or
seminars, or to visit other universities or research sites to conduct research and scholarly work which cannot be done at
Laurentian
University. The per diem and kilometre rates to be calculated as per the
Canada Revenue Agency as of July 1st of each year of the Collective
Agreement.
(f) Page and reprint charges or costs incurred in the preparation and completion of scholarly manuscripts.
(g) Professional/academic development or upgrading.
(h) Hiring part-time assistants in support of research and teaching, excluding marking.
6.45.3 Expenditures must be approved in advance by the Dean/University Librarian and reimbursements will be made on
verification of receipts. In the event that expenditures are incurred in relatively small amounts - less than fifty percent
(50%) of the total or less than the remaining maximum allowable amount - reimbursements should be accumulated but
receipts must be submitted not later than
January 1 or July 1 following the date the expenditures have been made.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 149

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
6.45.4 Full-time Members who are on sabbatical leave, study leave, or voluntary reduced workload are eligible for the
professional development expenditures.
6.45.5 Any equipment purchased with funds provided under this Article remains the property of the
University but a Member shall have the right if she/he so chooses to buy back such equipment at fair market value.
6.45.6 Any unused portion of the maximum allowed for professional development can be carried forward for two (2) years
only.
LEAVES
ARTICLE 7.10 – RECOGNIZED AND OTHER
HOLIDAYS
7.10.1 The following days and all days generally declared to be recognised holidays by Federal or Provincial authorities
are recognised holidays and paid time off shall therefore be given to the Members on:
(a) Family Day, Good Friday, Easter
Monday, Victoria Day, Canada Day,
August Civic Holiday, Labour Day,
Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day,
Boxing Day, New Year's Day.
(b) And on such other holidays as declared by the Employer, including the customary Christmas recess.
ARTICLE 7.15 – VACATION
7.15.1 Vacation is the period during which a Member is not accountable to the University.
7.15.2 In addition to recognised holidays, each
Member is entitled to a vacation of twenty-five
(25) working days, after eleven (11) months of service and annually thereafter. Members on contracts of less than one (1)
year duration are entitled to a pro-rated period of vacation. When Members have accumulated five (5) full consecutive
years of employment at the University, for each year of employment thereafter they shall be entitled to an additional two
(2) days of vacation to a maximum entitlement of thirty-five (35) working days.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 150

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
7.15.3 The Members will be paid during vacation periods but there shall be no remuneration in lieu of vacation in the
event that the Members choose not to take their vacation allowance.
7.15.4 The Members are required to take the vacation to which they are entitled. Vacation may not be accumulated from
year to year.
The Members are required to take their vacation between Spring Convocation and
Labour Day, unless prior permission has been granted by the Dean/University
Librarian. Members may take their annual vacation at any time within that period provided that:
(a) The period of the vacation does not conflict with a time during which the
Members have scheduled duties assigned to them.
(b) The Members have indicated the dates of their vacation to the Dean/University
Librarian, through their Chair/Director at least one (1) month in advance.
7.15.5 In the event of the death of a Member, the value of any unused vacation entitlement will be paid to his or her
beneficiary.
7.15.6 Members retiring, resigning or whose limited- term appointment expires but who are unable to take their full
vacation entitlement shall be paid vacation pay as follows:
(a) Members retiring or resigning or whose limited-term appointments expire on
June 30 shall be paid a number of working days equal to their vacation entitlement minus the number of working days in
June that fall after the deadline for submission of final grades.
Members are considered to be on vacation starting on the first working day after Spring Convocation.
(b) Members retiring or resigning on
December 31 shall be paid a number of working days equal to their vacation entitlement minus the number of working
days that fall after the deadline of submission of final grades for three
(3) credit courses and mid-term grades for six (6) credit courses, and
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 151

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
December 31
(c) Members with limited-term appointments whose appointment expires on dates other than June 30 shall be paid a
number of working days equivalent to their vacation entitlement minus the number of working days that fall after the
deadline for submission of final grades and the date of the expiry of the term contract.
(d) The daily rate applied to the entitlements (paragraphs 7.15.6 (a) to
(c) above) shall be one two hundred and sixtieth (1/260) of the Member’s salary.
ARTICLE 7.20 – ABSENCE - GENERAL
7.20.1 The University as a community of scholars requires the availability of its Members on a regular and on-going basis
to ensure that the activities of the University scheduled and unscheduled can be carried out in an orderly manner.
7.20.2 Any absence shall not normally interfere with assigned and/or scheduled activities and the harmonious functioning
of the
Department/School.
7.20.3 Any absence from campus affecting teaching/professional librarian duties shall be governed by Article 5.15 –
Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of Academics.
7.20.4 From Labour Day to Spring Convocation absences of more than one (1) week require notification to the
Chair/Director and permission of the Dean/University
Librarian. Shorter absences require notification to the Chair/Director. When scheduled or assigned duties are affected by
an absence, Members shall make suitable arrangements through their Chair/Director who shall advise the
Dean/University Librarian when the absence has a significant impact on the Member's duties.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 152

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
7.20.5 From Spring Convocation to Labour Day,
Departments/Schools must maintain a fair and equitable system to assure a reasonable presence sufficient to administer
the
Department/School, to deal with correspondence and to maintain on-going availability for student counselling and other
unscheduled issues as they may from time to time arise. Absences during this period must be in accordance with this
system. For any absences of more than a week, prior written permission shall be obtained from the
Dean/University Librarian who shall not unreasonably withhold such permission.
7.20.6 Except where Members are on vacation, leave or other approved absence they must remain in communication with
their
Department/School so that it is reasonably possible for the University to contact and/or recall them on short notice.
7.20.7 It may in exceptional cases, be necessary for the University to recall a Member who is on vacation, leave or
formally approved absence as defined in Article 7.20.5 above. The
University will not do so arbitrarily or unreasonably. In such cases, the University will bear reasonable transportation costs
consequent upon any such recall.
ARTICLE 7.25 – SABBATICAL LEAVES
7.25.1 Preamble
In recognition of the fact that full-time
Members are required to continue to develop as scholars and researchers throughout their careers, the University
maintains a policy of sabbatical leave intended for academic study, research or writing which will be mutually beneficial to
the Member and the institution.
For this purpose, sabbatical leave is defined as a period during which a Member is relieved of normal duties in order to:
(a) Engage in further training, advanced studies or courses at a study or research centre, including language study.
(b) Devote more time to scientific or creative work.
(c) Improve the University's relations with
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 153

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 ther universities or countries in the capacity of a visiting professor or visiting librarian.
(d) Gain practical or professional experience in a field connected with the Members' academic or professional
specialization which will enable them to give instruction or, in the case of the library, service that is more complete and
suitable to the requirements of the time.
Members who are on sabbatical leave and who elect to remain on campus for all or part of the duration of the leave shall
not normally be assigned any formal workload nor shall they normally participate in any formal activities of the University
other than those required by this Collective Agreement.
Members who have indicated in their sabbatical plan their intent to spend part or all of their sabbatical leave on campus
are entitled to suitable office space on campus.
Sabbaticants required to move their offices shall have all moving and storage expenses paid by the Employer. The
Employer will replace Members on sabbatical leave when it deems it necessary. The Employer retains the right to limit the
number granted leave in keeping with its academic responsibilities.
7.25.2 Eligibility
Eligibility for sabbatical leave is subject to the following conditions:
(a) Members must have been full-time faculty Members of the University for the past six (6) consecutive years, holding the
rank of Full
Professor/Librarian, Associate
Professor/Librarian, and Assistant
Professor/Librarian at the time of application. They must be tenured at the time their sabbatical leave begins.
In exceptional circumstances tenured
Lecturers/General Librarians/Archivists with the requisite years at Laurentian are also eligible for sabbatical if they have
the approval of the
Dean/University Librarian to apply.
Where the leave is to be used for upgrading, the University shall give special consideration to employment equity goals.
Faculty Members' service for purposes of sabbatical leave eligibility shall be calculated from the date of their initial
full-time appointment
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 154

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 by the University or from the date of their last sabbatical leave, whichever is later. When
Members take a sabbatical leave, all accumulated years of eligibility entitlement are exhausted unless otherwise provided
for in this
Collective Agreement. Time spent on sabbatical leave, study leave, or leave without pay does not count towards
sabbatical eligibility. Sabbatical leave will not be automatic and shall be granted following an approved application
procedure, outlined below.
(b) In order to attract qualified faculty, the
Vice-President, Academic and Provost may from time to time grant credit towards a sabbatical leave for full-time faculty
service at another University, including service at a Federated or
Affiliated College of a University. Such entitlement will be specified in the initial letter of appointment.
(c) Under special circumstances, the
Members may make application for leave one (1) year prior to the year in which they would normally become eligible to
take sabbatical leave. If sabbatical leave is granted in this instance, the Members will receive a stipend of eighty percent
(80%) of their salary.
(d) In the interests of effective scheduling of a Department’s/School’s course offerings, the Dean/University Librarian may
request that Members apply for their sabbatical leave after the completion of five (5) years. The
Dean/University Librarian shall make the request by May 1 of the academic year preceding the year in which the
Members are being requested to apply for sabbatical leave, and the Members shall respond to the Dean's/University
Librarian's request by June 1. Should the Members accept, the Members shall submit a sabbatical plan by
September 30 to the Chair/Director of the Department/School, as per Article
7.25.3 (b) below. Should Members accept, and if the application is approved, the Members shall receive a
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 155

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 stipend of eighty-five percent (85%) of their salary during the sabbatical leave.
7.25.3 Application
(a) Each Dean/University Librarian shall maintain and annually revise, in consultation with the
Department/School, a sabbatical eligibility plan for each
Department/School, the purpose of which is solely to assist in the orderly planning of sabbatical leaves. Copies of the plan
will be distributed by July 1 of each year to the Chair/Director who shall forward one to each
Department/School Member.
(b) Applications for sabbatical leave shall be submitted by the Members to their
Dean/University Librarian with a copy to Chair/Director of the
Department/School no later than
September 30 of the academic year preceding.
(c) The Dean/University Librarian shall make her/his recommendation to the
Vice-President, Academic and Provost no later than November 15 of the academic year preceding that in which the leave
is to be taken. After verifying the status of the application in relation to criteria defined in Articles 7.25.1 and
7.25.2 above, and after taking into consideration the recommendation of the Dean/University Librarian, the Vice-
President, Academic and Provost shall reach a decision and shall transmit it to the Member no later than December
15 of the academic year preceding that in which the leave is to be taken.
(d) The Vice-President, Academic and
Provost shall base her/his decision to approve or not to approve a sabbatical plan on the academic merits of the
sabbatical leave project and its value to the professional development of the
Member and to the University.
(e) Should Members wish to make subsequent changes in their sabbatical plan, they shall submit the proposed changes
to their respective
Dean/University Librarian for prior
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 156

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 approval. If the proposed changes are not approved by the Dean/University
Librarian after consultation with the
Department/School, Members may ask that they be submitted to the Vice-
President, Academic and Provost for approval.
(f) The Dean/University Librarian may refer back the application submitted by the Member as per Article 7.25.3 (b) above
or the application for change as per Article 7.25.3 (e) above. If referred back, the applicant shall consider the
Dean/University Librarian's suggestions and will re-submit a new application within ten (10) working days.
7.25.4 Postponement
(a) In the event that it is necessary on financial and/or program grounds for the Dean/University Librarian to require
postponement of a sabbatical leave, the Members shall be informed by July
1 of the academic year preceding that in which the sabbatical is to be taken.
Such a postponement shall not be required unreasonably. In such a case,
Members shall receive an additional five percent (5%) of their regular salary for the year of postponement as
"stipend" during their sabbatical year and shall receive one (1) year of sabbatical credit for the year postponed so that
their next sabbatical leave will occur according to their original sabbatical rotation. A sabbatical leave cannot be
postponed for more than three (3) years on financial or program grounds.
(b) (i) In the event that Members wish to postpone application for leave, they shall do so only for valid reasons, and
permission to do so shall be sought from the appropriate Dean/University
Librarian no later than May 1 immediately preceding the deadline for application specified in Article 7.25.3 (b) above. Such
permission shall not be unreasonably withheld.
Should Members with a sabbatical leave confirmed by
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 157

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 the Vice-President, Academic and Provost wish to postpone the leave for valid reasons,
permission shall be sought from the appropriate Dean/University
Librarian at least two (2) months prior to the planned commencement of such leave.
Such permission shall not be unreasonably withheld.
(ii) If postponement of application for leave or of approved leave is approved, such Members do not have right of
precedence over colleagues in the
Department’s/School’s sabbatical leave plan. Such
Members shall receive one (1) year of sabbatical credit for the year postponed so that their next sabbatical leave will
occur according to their original sabbatical rotation. In no case may such a postponement be for more than one (1) year.
(c) In the event that a Member’s tenure process is delayed for reasons of illness, pregnancy, parental or adoption leave,
such Members shall receive one (1) year of sabbatical credit for the year delayed so that their next sabbatical leave will
occur according to their original sabbatical rotation.
(d) Except in extenuating circumstances, where Members postpone a sabbatical leave without formal approval, they lose
the right of precedence over colleagues in the
Department’s/School’s sabbatical leave plan. Should such Members be required by the Dean/University
Librarian on financial and/or program grounds to postpone their sabbatical leave in the following academic year, they shall
not be entitled to any additional remuneration.
(e) Except in extenuating circumstances, where Members fail to apply for sabbatical leave for which they are eligible to
apply, they shall not be entitled to any additional remuneration should they be required to postpone their sabbatical leave
in the following academic year on financial and/or program grounds.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 158

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
(f) If Members' sabbatical proposals are rejected on academic grounds by the
Vice-President, Academic and Provost and/or Arbitration Board, they are entitled to apply the following year, but they are
not entitled to any additional remuneration.
(g) Deadlines may be waived by agreement of the Parties.
7.25.5 Duration
Members may elect a sabbatical leave for a period of:
(a) Six (6) months normally commencing either on the first (1st) day of July or the first (1st) day of January. or
(b) Twelve (12) months normally commencing on the first (1st) day of
July or such other date as agreed to by their respective Dean/University
Librarian. Such agreement shall not be unreasonably withheld.
7.25.6 Remuneration
(a) A Member taking a six (6) month sabbatical leave after six (6) years of accumulated sabbatical credit is entitled to full
salary.
(b) Members taking a twelve (12) month sabbatical leave after six (6) years of accumulated sabbatical credit are entitled
to a stipend equivalent to eighty-five percent (85%) of the salary they would normally have received.
(c) Upon the Member's request, the
University will provide a portion of the sabbatical leave stipend as a research grant subject to provincial and federal
regulations. A Member who receives such a research grant from the
University must make the necessary deductions and declarations as applicable under either the federal or provincial laws.
The University accepts no responsibility in this regard.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 159

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
(d) A Member on sabbatical leave shall not take other paid appointments without the prior written permission of the
Dean/University Librarian. Such permission shall not be unreasonably withheld. Normally, any additional remuneration
received during the leave will be limited to an amount which brings a Member's total to one hundred percent (100%) of
normal salary, plus travel and related expenses for the
Member's spouse and dependent children. Where total remuneration exceeds this amount, the University reserves the
right to reduce the sabbatical stipend proportionately.
(e) Members who will have accumulated unused sabbatical credit by the time of their normal retirement date will be
entitled to apply for a sabbatical leave to occur during their penultimate year before retirement, and on the understanding
that they will return to the University for their final year.
Should sabbatical leave be granted in such circumstances, Members are entitled to a stipend pro-rated on the basis of the
normal sabbatical stipend and shall include entitlement for the year of return. At their discretion, the
Dean/University Librarian may agree to pro-rate the period of time taken as sabbatical leave in lieu of a pro-rated stipend.
7.25.7 Benefits
(a) During the period of sabbatical leave, the Member shall continue to receive all benefits as per Article 8.45 –
Benefits subject to the conditions set out therein.
(b) During a sabbatical leave, pension calculations shall be based on the
Member's salary that would have been in effect if the Member had not been on sabbatical.
7.25.8 Vacation
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 160

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
All Members on sabbatical leave will be assumed to have used their prior year's annual vacation entitlement during the
period
July 1 to June 30 of the academic year in which the sabbatical leave is taken.
Furthermore, Members who take a six (6) month sabbatical leave shall be deemed to have taken half of their annual
vacation entitlement during the actual period of the sabbatical leave. Members will be entitled to one (1) year's vacation
entitlement after June
30 of the year in which the sabbatical leave is completed.
7.25.9 Return
(a) Members granted sabbatical leave shall undertake to return to the
University to resume their responsibilities as a full-time Member of faculty for the period of at least one
(1) year. Failure to return to the
University shall require the Member to reimburse the University for all of the salary and benefits received during the leave,
except as such obligations may be waived by the University.
However, when a Member is planning to retire in the academic year immediately following the Member’s sabbatical leave,
the Employer may waive the requirement to return to her/his responsibilities. Also, to facilitate earlier retirement, the
Employer and the Member may agree to an early sabbatical leave as per
Article 7.25.2 (c) above without financial penalty following which the
Member retires and is not required to return to her/his responsibilities. In both these situations, agreement of the
Employer is required.
(b) Members must prepare and forward to their Dean/University Librarian, within one (1) month of their return, a full written
account of their scholarly and professional activities and accomplishments as per the approved sabbatical plan during the
leave.
Members may make a written request to the Dean/University Librarian for a delay in the date of submission of their report.
This report shall become part of their file to be used in evaluating the
Member for salary increments and
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 161

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 promotions. Failure of a Member to submit the sabbatical report by the specified time
limit without adequate explanation may result in the delay of the decision whether to award or deny the annual increment
as per Article
8.20.11 of Article 8.20 – Procedures for the Award/Denial of a Progress-
Through-The-Ranks Increment.
Members who are not eligible for an annual increment must have their report submitted within one (1) month of their
return in order to begin to accumulate sabbatical credit without penalty. When Members fail to do so, sabbatical credit
shall not begin to accumulate until January 1 or July 1, whichever is the closest date next following submission of the
report. If, after reviewing the report, the
Dean/University Librarian finds the performance to be unsatisfactory, appropriate measures may be taken, as provided in
Article 5.75 –
Disciplinary Measures.
(c) Notwithstanding the provisions of
Article 7.25.9 (a) above, the University may grant up to a maximum of one (1) year of study leave to Members
immediately following the completion of their sabbatical leave provided that during this sabbatical leave the
Members were studying to obtain a
Doctorate, and the additional year of leave will allow them to continue the program for the Doctorate. Under exceptional
circumstances, upon recommendation of the Member's
Dean/University Librarian and with the permission of the Vice-President,
Academic and Provost, the study leave may be extended for an additional year. This back-to-back sabbatical/study leave
shall be granted to Members only once in their academic career. The Members shall receive a stipend, according to the
provisions of Article 7.30 – Study
Leave during this study leave, and must return to the University for a period equal to the total leave or, in the alternative,
reimburse the University for the full amount of the stipend and benefits received during the period of combined
sabbatical/study leave.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 162

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
The Member may request an altered pattern for the payment of the combined sabbatical/study leave stipends provided
that the payment in any one year may not exceed the stipend originally awarded for the sabbatical year.
7.25.10 Disability
In the event that a Member on sabbatical leave becomes unable to fulfil the sabbatical obligations because of disability
the following policies and procedures shall apply.
(a) The Member will advise the
Dean/University Librarian, as soon as possible under the circumstances, of the disability and will provide the
Dean/University Librarian with a physician's report outlining the extent of the disability and if possible the expected date of
return. For the duration of the illness the provisions of
Article 7.55 – Physical and Mental
Illness shall apply.
(b) In the event that the sabbaticant is disabled from performing her/his tasks for less than fifty percent (50%) of the
sabbatical leave, the Member shall be deemed to have taken her/his sabbatical leave. The Member shall submit a report
on her/his sabbatical activities on completion of the sabbatical leave or at the end of the sick leave, whichever occurs
later. The impact of the illness on the sabbatical plan of the Member shall be taken into consideration at evaluation time.
(c) In the event that the Member is disabled from performing her/his tasks for more than fifty percent (50%) of the
sabbatical leave, the Member shall be deemed not to have taken a sabbatical leave. The Member shall be eligible to take
her/his sabbatical leave at the first mutually acceptable time. If the
Member indicates that she/he will carry out the previously approved sabbatical plan then the Dean/University
Librarian, on the advice of the
Department/School and in consultation with the Member, will determine the date on which the sabbatical leave will
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 163

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 commence. In the event that the
Member wishes to amend the sabbatical plan, the provisions of
Article 7.25.3 (f) above shall apply.
7.25.11 Sabbatical Leave After Three Years
While sabbaticals after six (6) years are the norm, the Parties recognize that outside of the sabbatical eligibility plan,
which will take precedence, it may be mutually beneficial to
Members and the University if Members were to take a six (6) month sabbatical at eighty- five percent (85%) salary after
three (3) years of service. For each six (6) months of service beyond three (3) years the sabbaticant is eligible for an
additional two and a half percent (2.5%) of salary during the leave period. In no case may a proposed or approved
sabbatical leave after three (3) years be postponed for more than one (1) year. When Members take a sabbatical leave
after three (3) years all accumulated years of eligibility are exhausted except as otherwise provided for by this Collective
Agreement.
When the sabbatical leave is postponed, the
Member shall receive one (1) year sabbatical credit for the year postponed so that their next sabbatical leave will occur
according to their original sabbatical rotation. Sabbaticals after three (3) years can be granted provided that:
Eligibility
(a) Members have tenure when the leave becomes effective;
(b) Such a leave does not require the postponement of a sabbatical leave for a Member with six (6) or more years of
service;
(c) The leave does not have a negative impact on the budget of the
Department/School.
Return
(a) Members granted sabbatical leave under this Article shall undertake to return to the University to resume
responsibilities as a full-time Member of faculty for the period of at least six
(6) months. Failure to return to the
University shall require the Member to reimburse the University for all of the salary and benefits received during the
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 164

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 leave, except as such obligations may be waived by the University.
However, when a Member is planning to retire in the academic year immediately following the Member’s sabbatical leave,
the Employer may waive the requirement to return to her/his responsibilities. Also, to facilitate earlier retirement, the
Employer and the Member may agree to an early sabbatical leave as per
Article 7.25.2 (c) above without financial penalty following which the
Member retires and is not required to return to her/his responsibilities. In both these situations, the Employer has to agree.
(b) Members must prepare and forward to their Dean/University Librarian and
Chair/Director of the
Department/School, within one (1) month of their return, a full written account of their scholarly and professional activities
and accomplishments as per the approved sabbatical plan during the leave, as outlined in Article 7.25.9 (b) above.
ARTICLE 7.30 – STUDY LEAVES
A leave for the purpose of upgrading academic qualifications, normally through the attainment of a higher degree or some
other equivalent acceptable to the University and the Department/School shall be known as
Study Leave. Such leave must be in the best interests of the University. The maximum length of leaves to be granted
during a
Member's academic career shall normally not exceed two (2) years.
7.30.1 Eligibility
A study leave may be granted to a tenured, probationary or Master Lecturer Member after two (2) years of full-time
service, but no sooner than two (2) years after a sabbatical leave except as permitted in Article 7.25.9 (c) of Article 7.25 –
Sabbatical Leaves. Such leave will not be automatic and shall be granted only upon the approval by the Vice-
President, Academic and Provost, subsequent to consultation with the Department/School through its Chair/Director and
the appropriate
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 165

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Dean/University Librarian, upon an approved application procedure noted below. In the event that the Employer is unable
to grant a study leave to an applicant in one (1) given year, the Employer shall make every reasonable effort to ensure
that the study leave is granted to the Member in the subsequent year of application.
7.30.2 Application
(a) Applications for study leave shall be made by September 30 in consultation with the Department/School through the
Chair/Director and the appropriate
Dean/University Librarian to the Vice-
President, Academic and Provost. In submitting an application for study leave, the Members shall provide a well
considered plan indicating the value of the leave to their professional improvement and to the best interest of the
University. In forwarding the application to the Dean/University
Librarian, the Department/School through the Chair/Director shall recommend for or against approval, including in the
recommendation not only an assessment of the project but also a judgement on how the leave, if granted, will affect the
academic program(s) and the budget of the particular Department/School. In forwarding the application to the Vice-
President, Academic and Provost, the
Dean/University Librarian shall make an assessment of the application on the same grounds. The
Dean/University Librarian will, at the
Dean/University Librarian's discretion, make whatever inquiry they deem desirable, including consideration of the
applicant's demonstrated potential, in order to determine the merit of the application. Copies of both the
Department/School's and the
Dean’s/University Librarian's recommendations shall be made available to the applicant.
(b) Applications for study leave shall be filed with the Vice-President, Academic and Provost no later than October 31 of
the academic year preceding that in which the leave is to be taken. The
Vice-President, Academic and Provost shall verify the status of the application
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 166

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 in relation to the relevant University policies and the financial implications of the leave,
and make a decision, a copy of which shall be sent to the
Member. The decision of the Vice-
President, Academic and Provost shall be final and binding.
(c) In the event that the Vice-President,
Academic and Provost finds it necessary to refuse Members their study leave on financial grounds after the leave had
been approved, that
Member shall be given priority within the Member's Department/School for a study leave for the following year.
(d) Deadlines listed above may be waived in special circumstances.
7.30.3 Terms
(a) A one (1) year study leave may be granted to a tenured, probationary or
Master Lecturer Member after two (2) years of service at a stipend of
$35,525 on July 1, 2017, $36,093 on
July 1, 2018 and $36,707 on July 1,
2019 or a pro-rated amount if the leave is for a period of less than one (1) year.
(b) A two (2) year study leave may be granted to a tenured, probationary or
Master Lecturer Member after four (4) years of service at a stipend of
$35,525 on July 1, 2017, $36,093 on
July 1, 2018 and $36,707 on July 1,
2019.
(c) A Member may request a temporary reduction in workload to undertake or complete Doctoral studies. Where, in the
discretion of the Vice-President,
Academic and Provost and upon recommendation of the
Dean/University Librarian, satisfactory replacement arrangements can be made, the workload reduction will be granted
with a proportionate reduction in salary based on the overload stipend.
(d) The maximum period of absence is two
(2) consecutive years, normally
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 167

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 commencing on July 1.
(e) In the event that Members wish to pursue a summer course for upgrading purposes, they may request up to four
(4) weeks at full pay if they contribute equal time from their vacation period without losing any of their study leave
entitlement. To apply for such a leave,
Members will follow the procedures set out in Article 7.30.2 above.
7.30.4 Benefits
Benefits of insurance, pension, etc., will continue during the leave provided the
Members continue payment of their portion of the fees.
7.30.5 Return
(a) The Members must agree in writing to return immediately to the University for a period equal to their leave of absence
but in no case for a period of less than one (1) year or to reimburse the University for the full amount of the stipend
received. If Members return to the University for a period of time less than the length of the leave, the
University shall require the Members to reimburse the University for all or part of their stipend received during the leave.
(b) The Members must prepare and forward to their Dean/University
Librarian and Chair/Director of the
Department/School, within one (1) week of their return, a full written account of their scholarly activities during the study
leave. The report shall become part of their personnel file.
(c) Time spent on study leave does not count towards sabbatical credit.
7.30.6 Appointments while on Leave
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 168

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
All Members on study leave must obtain written approval in advance from the
Dean/University Librarian for any paid activity before making any such commitment.
ARTICLE 7.35 – VOLUNTARY REDUCED
WORKLOAD
7.35.1 The Employer and the Union endorse the principle of voluntary reduced workload as being mutually beneficial to
the Members and the institution. Any full-time Member of the
Bargaining Unit who currently occupies a regular full-time position and who has a minimum of two (2) years of continuous
full- time service at the University at their request may be granted up to fifty percent (50%) temporary reduction in
workload with a proportionate reduction in salary, and annual vacation entitlement, provided that:
(a) The temporary reduction is effective for a twelve (12) month period.
(b) The request is normally made to the
Department/School and the
Dean/University Librarian three (3) months in advance.
(c) The Dean/University Librarian approves the request, such approval not to be unreasonably withheld.
7.35.2 Notwithstanding Article 7.35.1 (a) above, the
University may, upon request, grant voluntary reduced workloads for periods longer than twelve (12) months and/or
renewals of twelve
(12) month reduction periods, subject to the
Dean’s/University Librarian's approval as in
Article 7.35.1 (c) above.
7.35.3 Faculty Members on Voluntary Reduced
Workload have the right to benefits and to contribute to the benefits plan of the University in accordance with the
provisions of the
Collective Agreement for sharing contributions.
(a) Sick leave. Members will be covered for periods of sick leave to the extent of the actual salary paid during that period
as per Article 7.55 – Physical and Mental Illness.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 169

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
(b) Long-Term Disability. Members who are planning to take a voluntary reduced workload must be provided with specific
information concerning coverage for Long-Term Disability during and after the period of voluntary reduced workload.
Members should not accept voluntary reduced workload without a full and complete written statement concerning
Long-Term
Disability coverage.
(c) Pension Plan. Members on voluntary reduced workload may contribute to the pension plan on the basis of their normal
full salary with appropriate contributions from the Employee and
Employer as outlined in the Collective
Agreement to the extent possible under Revenue Canada regulations. It is understood that contributions based on normal
salary rather than reduced salary may not be possible under
Revenue Canada regulations for a cumulative total of more than five (5) years.
(d) Life Insurance. Life insurance may be carried based on the Member's normal salary and normal maximum.
(e) Sabbatical Leave. Sabbatical leave entitlements for Members on voluntary reduced workload will be pro-rated in
accordance with the reduced workload.
7.35.4 Members who use this option shall remain
Members of the Bargaining Unit, notwithstanding the definition of membership as defined in Article 2.15 – Recognition of
the
Bargaining Unit.
7.35.5 For the application of tenure and promotion policies, periods of reduced workload shall be pro-rated in accordance
with the reduction in workload. Full-time research and teaching activities at another institution while a Member is on
voluntary reduced workload at
Laurentian will be counted for purposes of the minimum time requirement for promotion.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 170

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
7.35.6 Members on voluntary reduced workload retain both the right and the obligation to contribute to the administrative
work of the
University. Evaluations of such activity by the
Dean/University Librarian would be expected to recognise the reduced workload of the
Member. As full-time Members of the
Bargaining Unit, Members on voluntary reduced workload retain the right to participate in academic councils as full voting
Members and to receive minutes and other
Departmental/School and University documents and communications if the
Member can be present on campus. If
Members are absent from campus, the
University is not required to undertake extraordinary steps to assure the ability of the
Member to fully participate.
7.35.7 During the period of voluntary reduced workload, Members are expected to submit annual reports as per Article
5.45 – Annual
Report for Members in order to qualify for
Progress-Through-The-Ranks increments
(Article 8.15 – Progress-Through-The-Ranks
Increments and Article 8.20 – Procedures for the Award/Denial of a Progress-Through-The-
Ranks Increment). The evaluation will take into account the reduced workload. If awarded, the
Progress-Through-The-Ranks increment will be added to the base salary of the Member. The new base salary will be
used to determine the actual salary of the
Member in conformity with the percent reduction in workload.
ARTICLE 7.40 – LEAVES OF ABSENCE WITHOUT
PAY
7.40.1 A Member may be granted a leave of absence without pay under terms approved by the
University. All such terms including arrangements for benefits shall be set out in written form prior to the leave. All terms
shall be communicated in written form to the Union for information prior to the leave. Permission for such leave shall not
be unreasonably denied by the Employer.
7.40.2 An application for such leave shall normally be submitted in writing to the Dean/University
Librarian at least six (6) months in advance stating the purpose of the leave. An application for an extension should be
made in writing to the Dean/University Librarian at least four (4) months in advance. These time requirements may be
waived in special circumstances.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 171

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
7.40.3 Applications for such leaves shall be recommended by the Dean/University
Librarian after consultation with the
Department/School. Final approval rests with the Vice-President, Academic and Provost.
7.40.4 Leave of absence without pay under this
Article shall normally not exceed two (2) years.
7.40.5 The Members may elect to discontinue the benefits during the leave of absence subject to existing policies and
regulations. If they elect to continue those benefits available to the Members, they shall make suitable arrangements as
defined in Article 7.40.1 above.
7.40.6 Court and Political leaves shall be governed by Article 7.45 – Court Leaves and Article
7.50 – Political Leaves.
ARTICLE 7.45 – COURT LEAVES
7.45.1 Leave of absence with pay shall normally be granted to any Member, other than a Member on leave of absence
without pay, who is required to serve on a jury or to attend as a witness or an expert in a court of justice or before any
legal or statutory body in Canada with power to compel the attendance of witnesses before it.
7.45.2 The Members shall notify their
Dean/University Librarian in advance, in writing, and shall provide proof of their attendance, if so requested.
Members shall attempt to make arrangements to ensure that their duties are properly carried out during the period of their
absence.
7.45.3 Leave with pay does not apply to Members serving a sentence or appearing as a witness on their own behalf.
7.45.4 When Members wish time off in order to pursue a civil action in court, the Members shall apply to the
Dean/University Librarian for leave of absence without pay. (See Article
7.40 – Leaves of Absences Without Pay.)
7.45.5 If Members are required to absent themselves from their duties to appear in court as a result of legal action taken
against them in regard to matters arising out of the performance of their duties to the University, they shall not be
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 172

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 penalised for such absence. Such an absence shall be governed by Article 7.45.2
above.
ARTICLE 7.50 – POLITICAL LEAVES
7.50.1 The Employer recognises that all Members of the Bargaining Unit are free to enter public life and to seek any
political office, as a Member of the provincial or federal government, or any full-time political office.
7.50.2 If Members of the Bargaining Unit wish to allow their names to stand either before a party convention or for actual
nomination for an election, the Members shall notify the
Dean/University Librarian concerned within a reasonable time so that the Dean/University
Librarian may make whatever arrangements may be deemed necessary in order to ensure that the resulting added
workload can be properly performed by others from the date of the issuance of the writ up to and including the date of the
election.
7.50.3 The Employer may grant such a Member leave without pay for a period from the issuance of the writ up to and
including election day. Such leave shall not be unreasonably withheld.
7.50.4 Should the Members not be elected, they shall come back to work immediately to assume their normal duties.
7.50.5 If the Members are elected and:
(a) If they are Members with tenure and return immediately upon ceasing to hold office within six (6) years of their
election, all rights, privileges and rank shall be restored to them upon return and the Members shall be entitled to a rate of
pay including all statutory increases which were granted to
Members of the teaching staff of equal rank that the Members occupied at the time the leave was granted. Extensions of
the six (6) year time limit may be made by agreement of the Parties. During the term of any such leave, the Members shall
be entitled to leave without remuneration. Such Members shall not be entitled to any rights or privileges under this
Collective
Agreement except in regards to benefits as governed by Article 7.40 –
Leaves of Absence Without Pay.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 173

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Nothing in this Article shall be construed as preventing such
Members from being employed on a part-time basis by the University for lecturing/professional library service or for any
task, in which case the
Members shall be remunerated therefore at the normal scale for part- time Members of the teaching/professional library
staff.
(b) If they are a Member without tenure, they shall be deemed to have resigned their position with the University as of the
day following their election.
7.50.6 Any Members of the Bargaining Unit who wish to run for a political office other than a full-time one are free to do so
subject to Article 5.15 –
Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of
Academics. Any such Members of the
Bargaining Unit shall be required to perform all normal duties as set out in this Collective
Agreement.
ARTICLE 7.55 – PHYSICAL AND MENTAL ILLNESS
7.55.1 The Members of the Bargaining Unit are eligible for sick leave up to a maximum of six
(6) months at salary otherwise receivable from the date of disability due to accident or illness, for each separate disability
cause, excluding pregnancy which shall be covered by the provisions of Article 7.60 – Pregnancy,
Parental and Adoption Leaves. Illness of a duration of more than six (6) months will be dealt with according to the
provisions of the
University's Long-Term Disability Plan, and the Employer agrees that there shall be no amendments to that plan during
the life of the
Collective Agreement which shall materially affect the nature or level of the benefits to which a Member is entitled. As
soon as practicable after the start of each disability period, the Dean/University Librarian must be informed by or on behalf
of the disabled about the absence and about its expected duration.
Where the Employer makes payment to the
Member according to the above mentioned terms or assumes liability therefore, the
Employer is subrogated to all rights of recovery of the Member to the extent that the
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 174

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Employer has made payment to, or on behalf of, or for the benefit of the Member. The
Employer may bring an action in the name of the Member to enforce these rights.
7.55.2 (a) A Member shall, when requested by the Dean/University Librarian, submit the certificate of a legally qualified
medical practitioner certifying that the
Member is unable to attend to the duties of her/his position;
(i) For any sick leave in excess of five (5) consecutive working days.
(ii) In the event a Member's sick leave pattern raises substantial doubt of the claim, even if the individual's sick leave
periods are short enough not to require medical certificates otherwise.
(b) In this Article, a “legally qualified medical practitioner” shall be limited to licensed physicians, licensed midwives,
registered nurse practitioners, licensed dentists and registered psychologists.
Please note that being under the care and treatment of a person other than a licensed physician, a Member may
jeopardize qualifying for Long-Term
Disability. A physician is a person who is duly licensed to practice medicine and is recognized by the College of
Physicians and Surgeons.
(c) The Member shall only be required to submit one medical certificate of disability or illness per absence, unless the
expected duration of the absence is extended beyond the prognosis provided in the original certificate. In such
circumstances the Member shall submit additional certificates of disability or illness for each extension.
(d) Any certificate of disability or illness submitted, in addition to certifying that the Member is unable to attend to the
duties of her/his position, shall indicate the probable duration of the Member’s absence but the legally qualified medical
practitioner shall not disclose any information respecting the
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 175

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 diagnosis of the condition giving rise to the Member’s absence, without the
Member’s written and informed consent.
(e) Where the certificate is submitted by a
Member or on behalf of a Member, a copy of the certificate of disability produced shall be provided to the
Union by the Dean/University Librarian.
Where the certificate is requested under Article 7.55.2 (a) (ii) above, a copy of the request for the certificate and a copy of
the certificate of disability produced shall be provided to the Union by the Dean/University
Librarian.
(f) Upon receipt of any certificate of disability, the Dean/University Librarian shall advise the Member of the
Member’s right to accommodation if such accommodation will assist the
Member to return to work to full or partial duties, or will assist the Member to return to work at an earlier date than would
otherwise be the case.
(g) If the Member requires or wishes accommodation, the Member shall submit to the Dean/University Librarian the
certificate of a legally qualified medical practitioner certifying the details of the accommodation that the
Member requires and the expected duration of the accommodation.
(h) A copy of the certificate provided pursuant to Article 7.55.2 (g) above shall be provided to the Union by the
Dean/University Librarian.
(i) The Employer, the Union and the
Member will cooperate fully to achieve the accommodation required by the
Member, and to ensure, where possible, that any changes to the
Member’s workplace required by the accommodation are in place for the
Member’s return.
(j) The reasonable costs of any certificates required under this Article shall be paid by the Member and reimbursed by the
Employer to the
Member.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 176

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
7.55.3 In order to have a sick leave benefits period reinstated up to the maximum, Members of the Bargaining Unit who
have been absent and in receipt of sick leave benefits must return to work for at least one (1) full working day in the case
of a completely unrelated and different disability cause, and for thirty (30) calendar days in the case of the same disability
cause.
7.55.4 Sick leave benefits for any period of absence following notice of termination of employment will not be payable
without substantiating medical evidence and shall cease no later than the date of termination.
7.55.5 Sick leave benefits are not cumulative and are not cashable upon termination of employment or at any other time.
7.55.6 Sick leave benefits will be reduced by the amount of any Worker's Compensation benefits or similar disability
income benefits which the Member of the Bargaining Unit is eligible to receive by reason of accident or sickness, from a
government plan, except
Unemployment Insurance.
(a) A Member may be required by the
Vice-President, Academic and Provost to undergo a medical examination by a legally qualified medical practitioner
appointed by the University in the following circumstances:
(i) If the Member submits a request for accommodation pursuant to Article 7.55.2 (g) above;
(ii) At the time the Member indicates her/his readiness to return to work, if the absence has been for a period of a month
or more;
(iii) At one other time during the sick leave; and
(b) The Employer shall pay all costs of the medical practitioner and shall pay all reasonable expenses incurred by the
Member with respect to such medical examination.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 177

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
(c) Where the Employer requires the
Member to undergo a medical examination pursuant to Article 7.55.6
(a) above it shall notify the Member with a copy to the Union and it shall provide the Member with the names of three (3)
duly qualified medical practitioners and the Member shall select one of those practitioners to conduct the examination.
(d) The medical practitioner who conducts the examination shall provide a report to the Member, which report shall certify
whether or not the Member is medically able to perform the duties of her/his position, or whether the
Member could perform such duties with accommodation; a prognosis for the Member’s return to work; and, where
applicable, whether or not accommodation requested by the
Member is appropriate. The report shall not contain any diagnosis of the
Member’s condition, unless the
Member, in consultation with the
Union, requests that the diagnosis be included.
(e) Within five (5) working days of the receipt of the report, the Member shall provide the report to the
Dean/University Librarian who shall in turn provide a copy to the Union within five (5) working days.
7.55.7 When invalidity is due to drug addiction or alcoholism, benefits provided by this Article will be granted only for
leaves of absence necessary for proper treatment under a physician's care or that of specialized personnel.
7.55.8 When the Member’s behaviour raises reasonable and substantial doubt as to the state of her/his physical or mental
health, which affects in a material way the Member’s ability to perform her/his duties, or which raises real concern for the
safety of the
Member or other Members of the University community, the Vice-President, Academic and
Provost may require the Member to undergo a medical examination in accordance with
Article 7.55.6 above. The Union shall be notified when such action is taken. Where the report is requested as a result of a
real concern for the safety of the Member or other
Members of the University community, the report produced, in addition to the information provided pursuant to Article
7.55.6 (d) above, shall certify whether or not the Member’s
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 178

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 behaviour raises any real concern for the safety of the Member or other Members of the
University community.
7.55.9 Sick leave benefits defined in this Article may not be granted under the following circumstances:
(a) Intentionally self-inflicted injuries or diseases.
(b) Pregnancy (however, complications due to pregnancy are covered by sick leave provisions, upon submission of a
medical certificate).
(c) While vacation pay is also being received.
(d) Wilful participation in riots, wars or violent or uncontrolled demonstrations or protests.
(e) Injuries or diseases sustained while committing a criminal act for which the
Member has been found to be guilty by a duly constituted court or while serving a prison sentence.
7.55.10 If Members are on sickness or disability leave and consider that they have recovered and are capable of
undertaking normal academic activities, they shall present medical evidence from a medical practitioner to their
Dean/University Librarian. If the
Dean/University Librarian agrees, the
Members shall be reinstated with full rights and benefits forthwith. If the Dean/University
Librarian disagrees, the Dean/University
Librarian shall require the opinion of two (2) additional medical practitioners named by agreement with the Member or, if
there is no agreement, by the Ontario Medical
Association. The majority opinion of the three
(3) medical practitioners shall prevail. The
Employer shall pay the cost of such additional medical examinations required by it.
ARTICLE 7.60 – PREGNANCY, PARENTAL AND
ADOPTION LEAVES
7.60.1 Pregnancy Leave
(a) A pregnant full-time Member or pregnant Master Lecturer Member shall be entitled to seventeen (17) weeks
pregnancy leave.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 179

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
(b) During the period of pregnancy leave as specified in Article 7.60.1 (a) above, the Member shall receive from the
Employer:
(i) For the first week, one-hundred percent (100%) of her nominal salary;
(ii) For up to a maximum of sixteen
(16) additional weeks, an amount equal to the difference between the Employment
Insurance (EI) benefits received by the Member and one- hundred percent (100%) of the
Member's nominal salary;
(iii) Further, in the event of any reduction by the Government of
Canada to the Member's EI benefit entitlement, an amount necessary to ensure that the
Member receives the top-up described in Article 7.60.2 (b)
(ii) above.
(c) If the Member is disentitled or disqualified from receiving EI benefits or should EI cease to provide coverage for
pregnancy benefits or adjust the amount of benefits that were received, then the Employer shall maintain the
Member at one-hundred percent
(100%) of her nominal earnings for the period of her leave.
7.60.2 Notice Required for Pregnancy Leave
(a) The Member shall normally give the
Employer at least eight (8) weeks written notice of the date the pregnancy leave is to begin. The notice period may be
altered by mutual agreement or by the Member with a new written notice at least two (2) weeks prior to the date the
pregnancy leave is to begin.
(b) The notice period in Article 7.60.2 (a) above shall not apply if the Member stops working because of complications
caused by her pregnancy or because of a birth, still birth or miscarriage.
7.60.3 Duration of Pregnancy Leave
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 180

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
(a) The pregnancy leave of a Member who is entitled to take parental leave shall end seventeen (17) weeks after the
pregnancy leave began. In the case where the newborn child is hospitalized, a Member may postpone or interrupt her
pregnancy leave by the number of weeks the newborn child is hospitalized but it must be taken within the fifty-two (52)
weeks from the date of the birth of the child.
(b) The pregnancy leave of a Member who is not entitled to take parental leave shall end on the later of either the day that
is seventeen (17) weeks after the pregnancy leave began or the day that is six (6) weeks after the birth, still birth or
miscarriage.
7.60.4 Leave for Parent Not Taking Pregnancy or
Parental Leave
On the occasion of the birth of a child, surrogacy or the adoption of a child coming into the care or custody of a parent for
the first time, the child's parent who is not taking the pregnancy or the parental leave shall be entitled to a leave with full
salary and benefits of up to five (5) working days, to be taken at the discretion of the Member within the fifty- two (52)
weeks from the date of the birth of the child or the adoption of a child coming into the care or custody of a parent for the
first time.
7.60.5 Parental Leave on the Occasion of the
Birth of a Child
(a) On the occasion of the birth of a child, a Member who is a parent and who has opted to take parental leave under the
Employment Insurance Act and applicable legislation shall be entitled to a parental leave of up to thirty-five
(35) weeks.
(b) During the period of parental leave as specified in Article 7.60.5 (a) above, the Member shall receive from the
Employer:
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 181

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
(i) For the first week, one-hundred percent (100%) of her/his nominal salary;
(ii) For up to a maximum of eight
(8) additional weeks, an amount equal to the difference between the EI benefits received by the
Member and one-hundred percent (100%) of the Member's nominal salary;
(iii) Further, in the event of any adjustment by the Government of Canada to the Member's EI benefit entitlement, the
Employer shall pay to the
Member the amount necessary to ensure that the Member receives the top-up described in
Article 7.60.5 (b) (ii) above.
(c) If the Member is disentitled or disqualified from receiving EI benefits or should EI cease to provide coverage for
parental benefits or adjust the amount of benefits that were received, the Employer shall maintain the
Member at one-hundred percent
(100%) of her/his nominal earnings for the period of her/his leave.
7.60.6 Parental Leave on the Occasion of the
Adoption of a Child or Surrogacy
(a) On the occasion of the adoption of a child coming into the care or custody of a parent for the first time, a Member who
is a parent shall be entitled to a parental leave of up to thirty-seven (37) weeks. The parental leave must be commenced
within the fifty-two (52) weeks from the date the child comes into care or custody of the parent for the first time.
(b) During the period of parental leave as specified in Article 7.60.6 (a) above, a
Member shall receive from the
Employer:
(i) For the first week, one-hundred percent (100%) of her/his nominal salary;
(ii) For up to a maximum of eight
(8) additional weeks, an amount equal to the difference between
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 182

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 the EI benefits received by the
Member and one-hundred percent (100%) of the Member's nominal salary.
(iii) Further, in the event of any adjustment by the Government of Canada to the Member's EI benefit entitlement, the
Employer shall pay to the
Member the amount necessary to ensure that the Member receives the top-up described in
Article 7.60.6 (b) (ii) above.
(c) If the Member is disentitled or disqualified from receiving EI benefits or should EI cease to provide coverage for
parental benefits or adjust the amount of benefits that were received, the Employer shall maintain the
Member at one-hundred percent
(100%) of her/his nominal earnings for the period of her leave.
7.60.7 Notice Required for Parental Leave
(a) A Member shall normally give written notice to the Employer of her/his intention to take a parental leave at least eight
(8) weeks prior to the commencement of such leave. The notice period may be altered by mutual agreement or by the
Member with a new written notice at least two (2) weeks prior to the date the parental leave is to begin.
(b) The notice period in Article 7.60.7 (a) above shall not apply if the Member stops working because the child comes into
the custody, care and control of the parent sooner than expected.
7.60.8 Extended Parental Leave
An extended parental leave without pay, up to a maximum of one (1) year, shall be given to
Members who request it.
7.60.9 General Considerations
(a) During leaves under this Article, the
Member shall continue to participate in the pension plan and the other benefit plans set out in this Collective
Agreement. The Member and the
Employer shall each continue to pay
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 183

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 their applicable share of contributions and/or premiums.
(b) Nothing in this Article shall prevent a
Member from claiming sick leave for absences from work due to illnesses.
(c) Upon return to work, a Member who has taken leaves under this Article shall resume her/his former position with
her/his full nominal salary and benefits as provided for under this
Collective Agreement.
(d) The period of a Member's leave shall be included in the calculation of her/his length of service for seniority purposes.
(e) A Member on pregnancy, parental or adoption leave may elect to defer contractual decisions on reappointment or
tenure/permanence by an equivalent period of time. When a Member elects to defer such decisions, she/he shall provide
the Dean/University Librarian, or equivalent, with written notice of her/his intention to do so.
(f) The Parties agree that the provisions of this Article shall be no less than those in the Employment Standards
Act, 2000 and Employment Insurance
Act as may be further amended.
Differences in the interpretation of this
Article shall be resolved based on consistency with the Acts.
(g) Nothing in this Article shall prevent a
Member claiming pregnancy, parental or adoption leave during a sabbatical leave. Any unused portion of a sabbatical
leave shall be taken at a time mutually acceptable to the
Member and Dean/University Librarian
(h) If both parents are Members, they may share their paid periods of leave between them.
7.60.10 Workload reduction following Parental Leave
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 184

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
(a) Following parental leave, Members will not be required to teach within the term that they return from parental leave in
order to help re-establish their scholarly work.
ARTICLE 7.65 – SPECIAL LEAVES
7.65.1 A full-time Member, who holds a tenured or probationary appointment within the
University, shall be eligible for a paid leave of absence for a period of up to three (3) weeks to fulfill responsibilities relating
to the special needs of a Member of the Employee's family.
Special needs may include, but are not restricted to, resettlement of aged or disabled parents, serious illness of parents,
partner, or child, medical treatment of partner or child that cannot be provided in the Sudbury Region.
The teaching/professional and service responsibilities of Members on this leave shall normally be assumed by their
colleagues without additional expense to the University.
For periods in excess of three (3) weeks, a
Member may apply for leave of absence without pay as per Article 7.40 – Leaves of
Absence Without Pay. Such requests will not be unreasonably refused.
7.65.2 A Member taking a leave of absence exceeding six (6) months may elect to defer contractual decisions on
reappointment or tenure/permanence by one year. When a
Member elects to defer such decisions, the
Member shall provide the Dean/University
Librarian with written notice of the intention to do so.
ARTICLE 7.70 – COMPASSIONATE LEAVE
7.70.1 In the event of death of a partner, son or daughter (including step-son, step-daughter and child of partner), the
Employee shall be granted a leave of absence of up to ten (10) working days without loss of pay.
7.70.2 In the event of the death of another Member of an Employee's family, the Employee shall be granted a leave of
absence of up to five (5) working days without loss of pay.
The term “another Member of an Employee’s family” means brother and sister, step-brother and step-sister, mother and
father, mother-in- law and father-in-law, sister-in-law and brother-in-law, grandparent, guardian, grandchildren,
daughter-in-law and son-in-law.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 185

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
7.70.3 For a longer period of absence, a Member may apply for leave without pay according to
Article 7.40 – Leave of Absence Without Pay.
7.70.4 In the event of the death of an Employee’s nephew, niece, grandparent-in-law, aunt or uncle, the Member shall be
granted a leave of absence of one (1) working day without loss in pay.
7.70.5 If, during her/his vacation period, a Member is bereaved in circumstances under which she/he would have been
eligible for leave under this Article, she/he shall be granted leave and her/his vacation pay credits shall be restored to the
extent of any concurrent leave granted.
SALARY AND BENEFITS
ARTICLE 8.10 – SALARY STRUCTURE
Effective July 1, 2017, breakpoints are to be calculated on July 1st on the ranks as of July 1st.
The Salary Structure for the Academic Year 2017-
2018
8.10.1 The salary of each Member shall be composed of the base salary of each Member as of June 30, 2017 as modified
by the following items:
(a) A scale increase of one point five percent (1.5%) of the Member's regular salary.
(b) A Progress-Through-The-Ranks increment for the evaluation carried out for the year 2016-17 as described in
Article 8.20 – Procedures for the
Award/Denial of a Progress-Through-
The-Ranks Increment. The Progress-
Through-The-Ranks increments shall have a value of two thousand eight hundred dollars ($2,800).
For all ranks other than Full
Professor/Librarian, where a Member’s salary exceeds $148,289 per annum, the PTR will be at fifty percent (50%) value.
For all ranks, where a
Member’s salary exceeds $164,136 per annum, the PTR will be nil.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 186

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
(c) Additional qualification increments shall be awarded pursuant to Article
8.30 – Additional Qualifications
Increments.
(d) Promotion and Merit increments shall be awarded according Article 8.15 and to Article 8.25 – Merit Increments,
regardless of breakpoints.
8.10.2 The salary floors for 2017-18 shall be as follows:
Rank Floor
Lecturer / General Librarian $62,340
Assistant Professor / Librarian $75,152
Associate Professor / Librarian $90,116
Full Professor / Librarian $110,646
The Salary Structure for the Academic Year 2018-
2019
8.10.3 The salary of each Member shall be composed of the base salary of each Member as of June 30, 2018 as modified
by the following items:
(a) A scale increase of one point six percent (1.6%) of the Member's regular salary.
(b) A Progress-Through-The-Ranks increment for the evaluation carried out for the year 2017-18 as described in
Article 8.20 – Procedures for the
Award/Denial of a Progress-Through-
The-Ranks Increment. The Progress-
Through-The-Ranks increments shall have a value of two thousand nine hundred dollars ($2,900).
For all ranks other than Full
Professor/Librarian, where a Member’s salary exceeds $150,662 per annum, the PTR will be at fifty percent (50%) value.
For all ranks, where a Member’s salary exceeds $166,762 per annum, the PTR will be nil.
(c) Additional qualification increments shall be awarded pursuant to Article
8.30 – Additional Qualifications
Increments.
(d) Promotion or Merit increments shall be awarded according to Article 8.15 –
Progress-Through-The-Ranks
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 187

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Increments and Article 8.25 – Merit
Increments, regardless of breakpoints.
8.10.4 The salary floors effective July 1, 2018 shall be as follows:
Rank Floor
Lecturer / General Librarian $63,338
Assistant Professor / Librarian $76,354
Associate Professor / Librarian $91,558
Full Professor / Librarian $112,417
The salary floors effective June 30, 2019 shall be as follows:
Rank Floor
Lecturer / General Librarian $64,731
Assistant Professor / Librarian $78,034
Associate Professor / Librarian $93,572
Full Professor / Librarian $114,890
Effective June 30, 2019, for all ranks other than Full
Professor/Librarian, where a Member’s salary exceeds
$153,977 per annum, the PTR will be at fifty percent
(50%) value. For all ranks, where a Member’s salary exceeds $170,431 per annum, the PTR will be nil.
The Salary Structure for the Academic Year 2019-
2020
8.10.5 The salary of each Member shall be composed of the base salary of each Member as of June 30, 2019 as modified
by the following items:
(a) For July 1, 2019, a scale increase of one point seven percent (1.7%) of the Member's regular salary.
(b) For July 1, 2019, a Progress-Through-The-
Ranks increment for the evaluation carried out for the year 2018-19 as described in Article 8.20
– Procedures for the Award/Denial of a
Progress-Through-The-Ranks Increment. The
Progress-Through-The-Ranks increments shall have a value of two thousand nine hundred dollars ($2,900).
For all ranks other than Full Professor/Librarian, where a Member’s salary exceeds per
$156,594 annum, the PTR will be at fifty percent (50%) value. For all ranks, where a
Member’s salary exceeds
$173,328 per annum, the PTR will be nil.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 188

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
(c) Additional qualification increments shall be awarded pursuant to Article 8.30 – Additional
Qualifications Increments.
(d) Promotion or Merit increments shall be awarded according to Articles 8.15 – Progress-Through-
The-Ranks Increments and Article 8.25 – Merit
Increments, regardless of breakpoints.
8.10.6 The salary floors for 2019-20 shall be as follows:
Rank Floor
Lecturer / General Librarian $65,832
Assistant Professor / Librarian $79,360
Associate Professor / Librarian $95,163
Full Professor / Librarian $116,843
ARTICLE 8.15 – PROGRESS-THROUGH-THE-RANKS
INCREMENTS
8.15.1 The purpose of these increments is to provide, through a series of salary increases, orderly promotion within rank.
8.15.2 These increments shall be awarded annually for satisfactory performance of duties per
Article 8.20 – Procedures for the Award/Denial of a Progress-Through-The-Ranks Increment.
8.15.3 Increments may be withheld if performance is deficient, as outlined in Article 8.20 –
Procedures for the Award/Denial of a
Progress-Through-The-Ranks Increment.
8.15.4 Any Members who are promoted to a higher rank shall not be required to take a loss in salary. If such Members'
salaries are below the floor salary of the higher rank, they shall receive the floor salary upon promotion.
8.15.5 Promotion Increment: Effective July 1, 2009, there shall be an award equal to one (1) PTR increment added to the
Member’s base salary upon promotion from either Lecturer/General
Librarian to Assistant Professor/Librarian, from Assistant Professor/Librarian to
Associate Professor/Librarian, from Associate
Professor/Librarian to Full Professor/Librarian.
In no circumstances will a Member be awarded more than two (2) PTRs in any given
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 189

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 year, excepting the case of a reinstatement of the PTR increment as per Article 8.20 –
Procedures for the Award/Denial of a
Progress-Through-The-Ranks Increment.
ARTICLE 8.20 – PROCEDURES FOR THE
AWARD/DENIAL OF A PROGRESS-THROUGH-THE-
RANKS INCREMENT
8.20.1 When a Member's performance is judged to be satisfactory by the Dean/University
Librarian, the annual increment shall be awarded. The denial of an annual increment under this Article shall not constitute
discipline.
8.20.2 Decisions to award the annual increment or notification of a review as per Article 8.20.4 below shall be
communicated to the Members by June 30, provided that the Member submitted her/his annual report by May 15. If the
annual report is submitted after May 15, the decision of the Dean/University Librarian shall be communicated to the
Member within six (6) weeks after the Member’s annual report has been submitted.
8.20.3 For those Members on sabbatical or study leave, the decision whether to award the annual increment may be
delayed until submission of their final report as specified in
Article 5.45 – Annual Report for Members.
8.20.4 The Dean/University Librarian shall examine the annual reports as per Article 5.45 –
Annual Report for Members, and make such other inquiries, as she/he deems appropriate.
Where the Dean/University Librarian has concerns about the Member’s performance with respect to the awarding of the
PTR increment, the Dean/University Librarian shall first issue a written warning, stating the basis of the concerns, and
what needs to be done to remedy them. The Member shall be awarded the PTR increment for that year and shall indicate
in the following year’s annual report what measures the Member has taken to address those concerns. If in the following
year, the Dean/University Librarian is not satisfied that the concerns have been addressed by the Member and that the
Member does not show active participation and/or satisfactory performance in all three (3) areas, A), B), and C) (within the
provisions of
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 190

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Article 5.15 – Rights, Responsibilities and
Duties of Academics) or in the subset of those areas for which the Member’s terms of employment are relevant, the
Dean/University
Librarian shall communicate to the Member the possibility that the PTR will be denied. The
Dean/University Librarian shall specify the reasons and provide the evidence giving rise to this possibility. The
Dean/University
Librarian shall invite the Member to a meeting in order to address the concerns. The
Dean/University Librarian shall inform the
Union of the upcoming meeting and shall inform the Member of her/his right to be accompanied by a Union
representative. The review shall include a consideration of at least the three (3) previous annual reports, if available, and
a meeting with the Member.
The Dean/University Librarian shall invite the
Member to submit relevant materials.
8.20.5 When a review is undertaken under the terms of Article 8.20.4 above, the deadline for communicating the decision
to the Member is delayed by one (1) month from those stated in
Article 8.20.2 above.
8.20.6 After making her/his evaluation, the
Dean/University Librarian shall inform the
Member in writing whether the increment is awarded and shall provide a justification for the decision.
8.20.7 A Member whose annual increment is denied shall have the right of appeal to the Vice
President, Academic and Provost. In making her/his decision, the Vice President, Academic and Provost shall at a
minimum consult the annual report, the investigation made by the
Dean/University Librarian, and the appeal presented by the Member, and may consult more broadly. In cases where a
Member elects to appeal, the decision of the Vice
President, Academic and Provost shall be communicated to the Member within six (6) weeks of the Member’s appeal.
8.20.8 If the Vice President, Academic and Provost reverses the decision of the Dean/University
Librarian and awards the annual increment, a retroactive payment shall be made to the
Member as appropriate.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 191

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
8.20.9 There shall be no denial of a PTR increment to a full-time Member with a probationary appointment prior to the
Member's tenure decision as per Article 5.60 – Tenure
Evaluation Procedures.
8.20.10 A Member shall have the opportunity for reinstatement of the increment, as follows: A reinstatement of the
increment shall occur
July 1 for the academic year after the Member receives two (2) consecutive satisfactory annual assessments from the
Dean/University
Librarian, or after the Member receives a promotion in rank as per Article 5.65 –
Promotion Procedures, or after the Member receives a merit award as per Article 8.25 –
Merit Increments. The reinstated amount shall be equal to the amount of the PTR denied.
8.20.11 If, within three (3) years of the first denial of a
PTR, the Member’s performance is not satisfactory the Dean/University Librarian may deny the PTR, as per Article 8.20.4
above without a preliminary year of warning.
ARTICLE 8.25 – MERIT INCREMENTS
8.25.1 Merit increments are awarded by the Vice-
President, Academic and Provost and shall become a permanent part of the Member's salary structure. Only Full
Professors/Librarians/Archivists and Master
Lecturers are eligible for merit increments.
8.25.2 It shall be the goal of the Vice-President,
Academic and Provost to award merit increments to at least five percent (5%) of the
Full Professors/Librarians/Archivists and
Master Lecturers at Laurentian University.
Notwithstanding this goal, the criteria specified in Article 8.25.5 below shall not be violated.
8.25.3 All merit increments have the value of one
Progress-Through-The-Ranks increment.
8.25.4 Merit increments are awarded according to the procedures of Article 5.50 – Assessment of a Member’s
Performance. Only tenured
Members are eligible to vote.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 192

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
8.25.5 For Full Professors/Librarians/Archivists, the
Faculty Personnel Committee shall consider the award of merit increments in relation to criteria for promotion to the rank
for Full
Professor/Librarian. The Member’s performance at Laurentian University over a three (3) year time period or since the
award of the last merit increment, whichever is shorter, must be judged clearly above the level for promotion to Full
Professor/Librarian, as stated in Article 5.10 – Academic
Qualifications Guidelines.
For Master Lecturers, the judging of the applicant’s performance over the past three
(3) years, or since the award of the last merit increase, shall be based on consistently good teaching.
8.25.6 In making recommendations in merit increment cases, the procedure in Article 5.50
– Assessment of a Member’s Performance shall be followed.
8.25.7 All merit increments received previously or awarded during the academic year 2007-08 under the terms of prior
Collective
Agreements remain in force.
8.25.8 The determination of individuals to receive merit increments pursuant to Article 8.25.5 above shall not be subject to
grievance.
8.25.9 Although Lecturer, Assistant and Associate
Professors are not eligible for merit increments, as per Article 8.15.5 of Article
8.15 – Progress-Through-The-Ranks
Increments, Members in these ranks shall receive an additional PTR when promoted to the next rank.
ARTICLE 8.30 – ADDITIONAL QUALIFICATIONS
INCREMENTS
8.30.1 An additional increment, equal to the value of a Progress-Through-The-Ranks increment, shall be awarded to
individuals obtaining a first Doctorate provided that such a degree
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 193

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 was not a condition of nomination to a specific rank and salary as indicated in the letter
of appointment. Such an award will be retroactive to the first (1st) day of July immediately preceding the receipt of the
Doctorate. The Doctorate will be deemed to have been received when the individual can provide a diploma or a letter from
the university where the Doctorate is being obtained indicating that all the conditions for the Doctorate, including the thesis
defence and the corrections to the thesis, have been met. The Member shall apply for an additional increment through the
Dean/University
Librarian and must furnish a copy of the appropriate document.
ARTICLE 8.35 – OVERLOADS
8.35.1 All ranks of full-time Members who are teaching a course on a paid overload basis will receive a stipend as shown
below for courses beginning after these dates:
Full course Half course
(6 credits) (3 credits)
July 1, 2017 $10,322 $5,161
July 1, 2018 $10,487 $5,244
July 1, 2019 $10,665 $5,333
8.35.2 Where scheduled Continuing Education courses may otherwise have to be cancelled,
Members may, if they choose, agree to teach a course for an amount less than the overload stipend. The Union shall be
informed of any such agreement prior to its settlement.
8.35.3 In recognition of agreement by the Parties, that excessive overload teaching/professional
Library service is undesirable (specified in
Article5.40.6 (b) of Article 5.40 – Academic
Workload), the Dean/University Librarian has the authority to limit the number of overload courses a Member may teach in
any given academic year, or its equivalent in the Library.
In order to fulfil this function, the
Dean/University Librarian must approve all paid overloads including distance education courses and on-campus courses
administered by the Centre for Continuing Education. In decisions to limit the number of paid overloads, the
Dean/University Librarian shall be guided by her/his assessment of the total workload of the Member, the impact of
overload teaching/professional library work on the likely career progress of the Member, including the capacity of the
Member to undertake scholarly activity and administrative
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 194

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 duties expected of all Members. A decision by the Dean/University Librarian to limit paid
overloads in any academic year shall not be grievable.
8.35.4 Librarians and Archivists may be paid full or half overloads according to the schedule outlined in this Article.
8.35.5 All Members who believe they are entitled to an overload stipend shall apply per Article
5.40 – Academic Workload.
8.35.6 Full-time Members in the Department of Music teaching Applied Music courses on overload shall be paid the
following rate of pay:
Total hourly rate of pay
July 1, 2017 $67.71
July 1, 2018 $68.79
July 1, 2019 $69.96
ARTICLE 8.40 – DISTANCE EDUCATION COURSES
8.40.1 Normal function
The development and/or supervision of distance or on-line education courses are an integral part of University functions.
Therefore, the development and/or supervision of a distance or on-line education course may be part of a Member's
normal workload as per Article 5.40 – Academic
Workload and according to Senate regulations or may be carried out on an overload basis.
Prior to assigning the supervision of a distance or on-line course to a Member as part of her/his normal workload, the
Dean shall seek volunteers willing to teach such a course. The Dean shall not assign the development of a distance or
on-line education course to a Member as part of her/his normal workload without her/his prior consent in writing. The
development and/or supervision of a distance or on-line education course are governed by the terms and conditions of a
contract issued by the Centre for Continuing Education on behalf of the
University.
8.40.2 Equivalents
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 195

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
The development of a distance education course shall normally be equivalent to twice the credit value of the course but
may be equivalent to a lesser amount or up to a maximum of a full workload.
In all instances, a written statement of the equivalency will be provided in advance by the
Dean when the work is part of assigned workload and by the Director of Continuing
Education otherwise.
8.40.3 Copyright
Copyright for distance education courses shall be governed by Article 6.35 – Copyright.
8.40.4 Compensation
Where the development of a distance education course is not included as a part of a
Member's normal workload the payment shall be an overload payment based on the equivalence outlined in Article 8.40.2
above.
A Member may also agree to some combination of normal workload assignment plus paid overload as appropriate.
8.40.5 Supervision
Where the supervision of a distance education course is not included as part of a normal workload, the course shall be
paid for as identified in article 4.56- Rates of Pay for individuals who conduct instruction through distance education
delivery modes. The maximum pay shall be the rate of pay of a Sessional Member without establishment as per Article
4.55 Rates of Pay for
Sessional Members with restrictions as per Article 5.40.6 of Article 5.40 – Academic Workload.
ARTICLE 8.45 – BENEFITS
8.45.1 The following benefits are available to full-time
Members and Master Lecturer Members:
(a) Retirement Plan of Laurentian
University of Sudbury and its
Federated and Affiliated Colleges
(b) Group Life Insurance
(c) Accidental Death and Dismemberment
(d) Dependent Group Life
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 196

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
(e) Extended Health Care (including semi- private hospital coverage)
(f) Long-Term Disability
(g) Dental Care
8.45.2 Participation in the Retirement Plan of
Laurentian University of Sudbury and Its
Federated and Affiliated Colleges shall be mandatory for all new full-time faculty Members effective the date of their
appointment.
8.45.3 Effective July 1, 2011, Members shall only participate in the Defined Benefit component of the Retirement Plan and
Member contributions shall only be used toward funding the Defined
Benefit component of the Retirement Plan. All pension service contributions and benefits accrued prior to July 1, 2011,
shall remain in the hybrid component of the Retirement Plan.
Eligible Members shall participate in the
Laurentian University Supplementary Pension
Plan.
8.45.4 The cost of premiums shall be shared by the
Employer and the Member on the following basis:
Employer Member
Life Insurance 50% 50%
Coverage up to maximum of
$400,000
50%
Accidental Death 50%
& Coverage up to
Dismemberment maximum of
$400,000
50%
Dependent Group 50%
Life
Extended Health 100%
Care
Dental Care 100%
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 197

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Long Term 100%
Disability Coverage amount up to maximum of
$5,300 per month.
Effective July 1,
2019 coverage amount up to maximum of $6,000 per month.
Retirement Plan The Employer’s (a) Effective June contributions to 30, 2017, eight point the Retirement two percent
(8.2%)
Plan shall be at of the part of the least the amount Member’s required to fund Pensionable current service Earnings that is
costs and any below the year’s unfunded basic exemption as liabilities and defined by the solvency Canada Pension
liabilities, or 7.5%, Plan; whichever is greater, in accordance with the Pension
Benefits Act and regulations there under based upon the actuarial (b) Effective June valuations for the 30, 2017, six point
Retirement Plan four percent (6.4%) that the Employer of the part of the files with the Member’s
Financial Pensionable
Services Earnings that is
Commission of between the year’s
Ontario. Interest basic exemption and on the Employee the year’s maximum contributions to pensionable the Plan will be
earnings; credited at the
Plan rate of return.
(c) Effective June
30, 2017, eight point two percent (8.2%) of the part of the
Member’s
Pensionable
Earnings that is in excess of the year’s maximum pensionable
The Employer earnings. may take a contribution holiday in accordance with the Pension
Benefits Act and after discussion with the Pension
Committee only when required under the Income
Tax Act due to excess surpluses as defined under the Income Tax
Act 147.2(2) (d).
Any contribution holiday shall be
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 198

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 shared equally between the
Employer and
Employees.
8.45.5 Extended Health Care
Effective November 1, 2008, extended health care will be enhanced by providing full payment to paramedical practitioners
(audiologist, chiropractor, kinesiologist, massage therapist, naturopath, osteopath, podiatrist, and speech therapist) up to
an annual limit of two thousand two hundred dollars ($2,200) per benefit year per covered individual. Effective January 1,
2019, these benefits will be increased to an annual limit of three thousand dollars ($3,000) per benefit year per covered
individual.
Effective November 1, 2008, the professional services for a certified psychologist only will increase up to four thousand
dollars ($4,000) per covered individual per benefit year.
Extended health care will continue to provide payment, according to the Extended Health
Care Plan, to physiotherapists and athletic therapists without an annual limit.
8.45.6 Vision Care
Purchase and fitting of prescription glasses or elective contact lenses, as well as repairs or elective laser vision correction
procedures, up to an overall maximum increase to four hundred dollars ($400) per covered individual in any twenty-four
(24) consecutive months.
Effective January 1, 2019, purchase and fitting of prescription glasses or elective contact lenses, as well as repairs or
elective laser vision correction procedures will be increased to an overall maximum of five hundred dollars
($500) per covered individual in any twenty- four (24) consecutive months.
8.45.7 Hearing Aids
Effective July 1, 2016, up to two thousand dollars ($2000) per covered individual in any two (2) consecutive benefit years.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 199

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
8.45.8 Dental
The Employer shall pay one hundred percent
(100%) of the cost of the premiums of the dental plan in accordance with the current rate schedule as established by the
Ontario Dental
Association and including six (6) month recall, effective November 1, 2008.
Annual
Reimbursement
Maximum
Basic coverage, including major $3,000 services, per person per benefit year:
100% Reimbursement
Basic coverage by plan
80% Reimbursement
Major services by plan
Orthodontics Lifetime
50% Reimbursement coverage per Maximum by plan person $3,000
Effective June 30,
2020 100% Reimbursement
$5,000
Major services for by plan dentures and implants
8.45.9 Any Member on an unpaid leave of absence shall make special arrangements for benefit coverage as outlined in
Article 7.40 – Leaves of Absence Without Pay.
8.45.10 Benefits for the spouse and dependants of a
Member, enrolled in the various benefits plans at the time of death, shall continue for a period of two (2) years from the
date of death and shall terminate at the end of the month in which the death occurred, two (2) years after the date of
death.
8.45.11 Retirees Health Benefits Plan (RHBP)
(effective July 1, 2011)
(a) Member contribution increase to sixteen dollars and seven cents
($16.07) per month.
(b) Maximum benefit for single retirees increase to eight hundred thirty-eight dollars and twenty-seven cents
($838.27) per year.
(c) Maximum benefit for family of retirees increase to One thousand three hundred sixty-two dollars and nineteen
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 200

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 cents ($1,362.19) per year.
ARTICLE 8.50 – TUITION FEE EXEMPTION AND
SPOUSAL LIBRARY CARD
Tuition Fee Exemption
8.50.1 The following shall be eligible for Tuition Fee
Exemption.
(a) All full-time Members as of the effective date of appointment and all retired full-time Members.
(b) Spouses and dependants of all full- time Members, of retired full-time
Members, of deceased retired
Members and of Members who died while in the full-time employ of the
University. Dependants include wife and husband (including common-law relationships), children up to the age of
twenty-six (26) years (including natural, step, and adopted children, wards and other children for whom the Member is the
primary caregiver).
8.50.2 Exemption from tuition fees is subject to the following conditions:
(a) A student must remain in good standing as defined by the Registrar's
Office in order to qualify for tuition exemption. In the event of loss of good standing, the same course(s) or an equivalent
one(s) may be taken at the student's expense in order to reinstate good standing and eligibility.
(b) Students who are eligible for an exemption from tuition fees are not exempted from the payment of incidental fees.
(c) To the extent that a grant is specifically given to defray tuition a student who receives a grant is not eligible for
exemption from tuition fees.
(d) To the extent that tuition is reduced by a Laurentian University tuition scholarship, the student is not eligible for
exemption from tuition fees. Where
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 201

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 the funds are from an outside source this condition does not apply.
8.50.3 Eligibility ceases with the term immediately following the date of termination of employment of a Member, unless
otherwise specified in this Collective Agreement.
8.50.4 The Employer reserves the right to modify or rescind this policy depending on the development of future
government policy that has a bearing on this matter.
Spousal Photo ID Library Card
8.50.5 On an annual basis, spouses of all Members, including retired Members, deceased retired
Members and Members who died while in the employ of the University, upon request, will be supplied with a photo
identification library card at no cost to them except if they require a replacement for a lost card. The cards will receive a
renewal sticker yearly and be reissued only if necessary. The charge for replacement will be fifteen dollars ($15) per card.
ARTICLE 8.55 – MOVING EXPENSES
8.55.1 On initial appointment to the University each regular full-time Member shall be entitled to reimbursement for moving
expenses subject to the following conditions:
(a) All claims must be substantiated by official receipts or reasonable facsimiles.
(b) The University shall reimburse claims at the rate of one hundred percent
(100%) to a maximum of five thousand dollars ($5,000). In exceptional circumstances, the University may exceed this
amount. Such conditions will be specified in the initial letter of appointment.
8.55.2 Moving expenses include:
(a) Moving, packing, crating and unpacking of household goods and personal effects.
(b) Transfer of family by the most economical means of transportation.
(c) Reasonable living expenses for the
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 202

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 duration of the trip to the new location.
(d) One (1) advance visit for the purpose of securing suitable housing. The newly appointed Members may be
accompanied by their spouse in this instance.
8.55.3 Employees appointed on a contract of twelve
(12) month’s duration or less shall not normally be eligible to claim moving expenses. The Vice-President, Academic and
Provost may under special circumstances allow some amount of moving expenses to be reimbursed for such employees.
8.55.4 Moving expenses paid to a new Member will constitute a loan made by the University. This loan will be retired
when the Member has completed three (3) years of continuous service to the University, each year being equivalent to
one third (1/3) of the reimbursement of the loan.
8.55.5 Should the beneficiary of such a loan leave the University before completing three (3) years of continuous service,
for personal or disciplinary reasons, she/he must reimburse the University for the remaining unretired portion of the loan.
ARTICLE 8.60 – PHYSICAL EDUCATION FACILITIES
8.60.1 As of the effective date of appointment, all full- time Members, their spouses and dependants as defined in Article
8.50 – Tuition Fee
Exemption and Spousal Library Card shall be eligible for free Physical Education Centre membership subject to the
payment of an annual service fee and locker rental fee as established by the Division of Physical
Education.
ARTICLE 8.65 – PUBLIC LIABILITY INSURANCE
8.65.1 Subject to the express provisions of the current policy (ies) of insurance providing such coverage, the University
shall continue to maintain the present public liability insurance insuring, among others, Members who are acting within the
scope of their employment against liability claims (including negligence, property damage, personal injury, libel and
slander), up to a limit of four million dollars ($4,000,000). Any legal representation
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 203

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 to which Members are entitled under this policy shall be provided in a fair and equitable
manner. The Union is entitled to receive a copy of the insurance policy upon request.
Any changes in this current policy shall be made with the agreement of the Parties.
ARTICLE 8.70 – PARKING
8.70.1 The Parties agree that Members wishing to reserve a parking space in any parking area on campus shall pay the
fee established by the University. The parking fees shall be determined following consultation with the
Advisory Committee on Security Services on which the Union shall maintain its current representation of one (1) Member.
8.70.2 Members with a temporary or Long-Term
Disability or pregnant Members shall be entitled upon request to their Dean/University
Librarian to a reserved parking space close to their office.
ARTICLE 8.75 – REIMBURSEMENT OF EXPENSES
8.75.1 All Members will be reimbursed within the normal amounts payable following approval of the Miscellaneous
Expense Claim Form for reasonable out-of-pocket expenses incurred while on authorized business for the
University, such as parking fees, transportation costs, meal allowances, equipment for field trips, accommodation costs,
and incidental expenses. Receipts for such expenses will be provided where required. Claims can be accumulated but
receipts must be submitted no later than six
(6) months following the date of expenditures.
However, all claims for the previous fiscal year
(ending April 30) must be submitted by May
15.
The claim for reimbursement including receipts where required shall be submitted to the Member’s Chair/Director. In the
event that the Chair/Director is unwilling or unable to reimburse such expenses, the receipts for such expenses shall be
submitted to the appropriate Dean/University Librarian.
Amounts reimbursed will be according to the schedule of amounts in the Employer’s
‘Policies and Procedures Concerning Travel and Related Expenses’ as updated annually
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 204

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 and amended to include incidental expenses.
8.75.2 Prior to April 15, the Employer will send the link to the Policy and will remind Members that all receipts are due by
May 15.
ARTICLE 8.80 – POLICY AND PROCEDURES IN THE
EVENT OF DEATH
NOTE: The following procedures and practices are currently in place and are largely determined by external agencies. It
may from time to time be necessary to make adjustments to these procedures based on requirements of these external
agencies. The
Parties agree that such changes required by external agencies do not require prior approval.
8.80.1 The beneficiary is to contact the Pension and
Benefits Officer in the Personnel Office. If within seven (7) days the University has not been contacted by the beneficiary,
the
University shall make every reasonable effort to contact the beneficiary.
8.80.2 Life Insurance
(a) The Employee is insured for three (3) times salary to a maximum of four- hundred thousand dollars ($400,000).
(b) The following documents will be required to request payment of the insurance carrier:
(i) The beneficiary must complete a Statement required by the insurance carrier as well as provide her/his Social
Insurance
Number;
(ii) The notice of the Employee's death that appeared in the
Obituary Notices;
(iii) A Death Certificate;
(iv) The last insurance certificate that was issued to the faculty
Member.
(c) The Life Insurance proceeds are usually paid within one (1) month.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 205

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
8.80.3 Pension Plan
If the Member dies prior to receiving a pension, the following will be required to process the benefits:
(a) The University shall contact the
Beneficiary and outline the procedures to be followed.
(b) The Beneficiary must complete an
"Application for Death Benefit".
(c) Provide a Death Certificate.
(d) Provide a "notarial copy" of the
Employee's "Last Will and Testament".
(e) All Members should have a current
"Last Will and Testament".
(f) Beneficiaries of Members without a
"Last Will and Testament" will have to settle any disputes between potential
Beneficiaries (children vs spouse) in the courts, prior to receiving any funds from the Pension Plan.
The file will be forwarded to the Actuary for the calculation of the death benefit. Once that calculation is received, the
Beneficiary will be contacted. The Beneficiary can request a lump sum refund or a transfer to a R.R.S.P. that is not
subject to locked-in provisions.
The death benefit from the Pension Plan is usually paid within two (2) to three (3) months.
If the Member dies after commencing to receive her/his pension, the form of pension that was selected by the Member will
determine if further benefits are payable to the
Beneficiary.
8.80.4 Benefits to spouse and dependants shall continue as per Article 8.45.9 of Article 8.45 –
Benefits.
8.80.5 Every Member while employed by Laurentian
University will be expected to complete by
January 1, 2009 or within six (6) months of hire a statement to be retained in their
Personnel File indicating who shall have access to the Member’s computer files and office contents in the event of the
Member’s death or incapacitation. In the event of the death or incapacitation of the Member, the
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 206

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Employer shall review the Member’s files and office contents to retrieve the documents and files belonging to the
Employer. This review shall be consistent with Article 6.30 – Patents and Article 6.35 – Copyright. After this review, only
the person or persons named shall have access to the Member’s computer files and office contents. If there is no signed
access statement, the right of access shall go to the executor in the event of death, and to the next of kin in the event of
incapacitation. The executor or next of kin shall have access to the deceased Member’s files for a period of at least one
(1) year. The ownership of the computer files and office contents belonging to the Member shall be transferred according
to the Member’s will.
ARTICLE 8.85 – SALARY TO BENEFICIARY IN THE
EVENT OF DEATH OF FACULTY MEMBER
8.85.1 Salary Rate: shall be the rate of gross pay for the contract period, including any proportionate reduction in stipend
consequent on approved University policies.
8.85.2 Termination Date: shall be the end of the month in which the death occurs.
8.85.3 Period of Negotiations: where it would unduly retard settlement to postpone closure until the completion of a
Collective Agreement, an arbitrary figure in excess of any anticipated agreement may be used as the basis for settlement
by mutual agreement of the
Parties.
8.85.4 Vacation Pay: the lesser of two percent (2%) per week or eight percent (8%) per month of entitlement shall be
calculated on gross earnings paid during the period of the year to termination.
8.85.5 Sabbatical Leave: is an investment by the
University in an approved plan of professional development with a view to enhance future contributions to the work of the
University and the broader scholarly community. Sabbatical leave entitlement is not a benefit, which the
Employee or her/his assigns can claim as of right in the event of either termination (for any cause), retirement, or death.
For purposes of death benefits (Hospital care, Extended
Medical and Dental Insurance), any sabbatical stipend is to be regarded as the equivalent of
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 207

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 salary.
8.85.6 Contractual Travel Allowance: may be claimed by the Beneficiary for vouchered expenses incurred prior to
termination.
CHAIRS AND DIRECTORS
ARTICLE 9.10 – DUTIES OF CHAIRS/DIRECTORS
9.10.1 The Chairs/Directors are responsible for providing academic leadership to their
Departments/Schools. They serve as the representatives of their Departments/Schools in administrative matters, as well
as the official spokesperson of their Departments/Schools and they report to the Dean/University
Librarian.
In carrying out their duties, the
Chairs/Directors will ensure that the Members of the Departments/Schools have an opportunity to share in the
decision-making process, in the formulation of policies, and in the administrative tasks of the
Departments/Schools in accordance with the
Departments/Schools constitution, and in a manner that is consistent with the Collective
Agreement.
Chair/Director shall not be required to review or approve Member applications for reimbursement for Professional
Development
Expenditures (Article 6.45 – Professional
Development Expenditures and Article 4.70 –
Professional Development Expenditures for
Sessional Members). The Professional
Development Expenditures shall be submitted directly to the secretary for the department/school who shall in turn submit
the reimbursement forms to the
Dean/University Librarian.
9.10.2 Their duties are the following and shall be carried out in accordance with good administrative practices:
(a) To ensure that the Department/School has a constitution that clearly delineates a transparent and collegial decision
making process for the unit and that is consistent with this
Collective Agreement.
(b) To ensure that the Members of the
Department/School are informed of their duties and responsibilities in accordance with Senate regulations,
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 208

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 the regulations of the University and this Collective Agreement.
(c) To ensure that the Members of the
Department/School receive a copy of all formal correspondence exchanged with the Administration and are kept informed
of all discussions relating to
Department/School affairs.
(d) To convene and preside over meetings of the Department/School at regular intervals during the academic year and to
be an ex officio and voting Member of its standing committees.
(e) To prepare budgetary recommendations and administer the annual budget for the
Department/School in conjunction with the Dean/University Librarian and the appropriate internal body.
(f) To ensure the proper use and maintenance of space and equipment allocated to the Department/School.
(g) To submit the Department/School recommendations on the annual course offerings, full-time faculty workloads and
sessional contracts for
Members with establishment to the
Dean by February 15 following consultation with Members the
Department/School pursuant to Article
5.40.3. Recommendations for the
Library workload shall be submitted to the University Librarian by February
15.
(h) To ensure that the Members of the
Department/School receive a copy of the workload recommendations in (g) and the Dean’s/University Librarian’s workload
decision according to Article
5.40.1 of Article 5.40 – Academic
Workload, and that each Member also receive a copy of the sabbatical eligibility plans according to Article
7.25.3 of Article 7.25 – Sabbatical
Leaves.
(i) To ensure that students receive academic counselling on programs of
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 209

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 study and academic matters within the
Department/School.
(j) To ensure the Department/School maintains a roster of sessional
Members pursuant to Article 4.15.2.
(k) To prepare a succinct annual report, that shall not exceed 10 pages, for submission to the Dean/University
Librarian due by June 30. The report shall include information on the enrolment, curriculum and other pragmatic issues
facing the
Department/School. The report may also include information relevant to the cyclical program review and/or accreditation
and information on any resource issues. The annual report shall also include a list of Sessional
Lecturers with establishment in specific courses and a list of all Sessional
Members on the Department/School roster in accordance with paragraph (j)
The report shall be distributed to
Members of the Department/School prior to being submitted to the
Dean/University Librarian.
(l) To be responsible for presenting the academic programs of the
Department/School for accreditation or approval of external bodies.
(m) To maintain relations between the
Department/School and external professional constituencies and agencies and the wider community, as relevant and
appropriate: and to arrange representation as necessary.
(n) To perform such other duties in connection with the work and administration of the
Department/School as the appropriate
Dean/University Librarian may assign her/him, provided the request is reasonable and is consistent with her/his status as
a Member of the
Bargaining Unit.
ARTICLE 9.15 – SELECTION OF CHAIRS/DIRECTORS
9.15.1 The Chair/Director of a Department/School shall be appointed by the Vice-President,
Academic and Provost in accordance with the
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 210

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 procedures of this Article. The Chair/Director shall not serve for more than two (2)
consecutive terms.
9.15.2 The following procedures will be initiated by the Dean/University Librarian at least six (6) months before the end of
a term of a
Chair/Director or immediately if a post of
Chair/Director becomes vacant.
9.15.3 (a) The Dean/University Librarian shall ensure that there is a selection committee with the following composition,
including a Chair of the committee, in place within five (5) months before the end of a term of a
Chair/Director or immediately if a post of Chair/Director becomes vacant:
(i) One third (1/3) of the full-time teaching/librarian Members of the Department/School to the nearest whole number. The
Members of the committee shall be tenured or probationary appointments, if possible, and shall be elected by all the full-
time teaching/librarian Members of the Department/School.
(ii) The Dean/University Librarian as a non-voting Member.
(iii) The Chair/Director of another
Department/School appointed by the Dean/University Librarian in consultation with the
Department/School seeking a
Chair/Director.
(iv) At least one (1) Member of the committee shall be a woman.
Where the Department/School has no women Members and no woman is otherwise on the committee, the
Dean/University
Librarian, in consultation with the Department/School shall appoint a woman Member in addition to those described
above.
(b) The Committee shall elect a Chair from among its Members.
9.15.4 The Chair of the Selection Committee shall use all reasonable efforts to invite all full-time
Members of the Department/School (including
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 211

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 those on leave) to submit to her/him, within a specified period of time, in confidence, the
names of possible candidates and reasons supporting their candidature. Without disclosing the names of the individuals
submitting them, these names and reasons shall be communicated to the Selection
Committee.
9.15.5 In the event that no candidates are submitted by the Department/School within ten (10) working days of the
Selection Committee's request, the Committee may suggest a short list of its own or make a request to the Vice-
President, Academic and Provost to search for a candidate from outside the
Department/School or the University. In the latter instance, the Department/School shall be consulted for the names of
possible outside candidates.
9.15.6 (a) The Selection Committee, after undertaking any further inquiries that it deems appropriate and relevant shall
establish a short list of not fewer than two (2) and not more than three (3) candidates, unless it is convinced that it can find
only one suitable candidate.
(b) The selection committee shall evaluate candidates on the grounds of proven administrative ability, scholarly activity,
and teaching/librarian competence. The Selection Committee will be guided by Article 9.10 – Duties of Chairs/Directors in
making this evaluation. The Committee may wish to meet with the candidates.
(c) Prior to the compilation of its final short list, the Selection Committee will obtain, in writing, the consent of the
candidates on that list.
(d) The Department/School may wish to meet with the short-listed candidates prior to the balloting process.
9.15.7 Within ten (10) working days from the final receipt of names from the Department/School as per Article 9.15.4
above, the Chair of the
Selection Committee shall make all reasonable efforts to provide all full-time
Members of the Department/School, including those on leave, with a ballot. The ballot shall set out the short list of
candidates. The
Members shall indicate their one (1) preferred
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 212

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 choice, in confidence, to the Chair of the
Selection Committee within fifteen (15) working days from the distribution date noted on the ballot. The ballots shall be
opened and counted in the presence of the Selection
Committee.
9.15.8 In the event the Selection Committee finds only one (1) suitable candidate, the Chair of the Selection Committee
shall use all reasonable efforts to submit to all the full-time
Members of the Department/School, including those on leave, a ballot showing this candidate's name. Time limits for this
submission and the Member's responses shall be as set out in Article 9.15.7 above. The ballots shall be opened and
counted in the presence of the Selection Committee.
9.15.9 The Chair of the Selection Committee shall report the results of the selection process and its recommendation to
the Dean/University
Librarian.
9.15.10 If the Dean/University Librarian is prepared to accept the Selection Committee's recommendation then the
Dean/University
Librarian will forward this recommendation together with her/his own to the Vice-
President, Academic and Provost who will make the appointment.
9.15.11 Should the Dean/University Librarian not be prepared to accept the Selection Committee's recommendation, the
Dean/University
Librarian shall indicate her/his reservations to the Selection Committee and the
Department/School. If the Dean/University
Librarian and the Selection Committee are unable to agree on an appointment, the selection procedure shall be
reinstituted as in
Article 9.15.3 above.
9.15.12 The Chair/Director shall be a tenured or probationary Member of faculty. Any outside appointment shall be made
in accordance with
Article 5.20 – Appointment and Renewal.
9.15.13 In exceptional circumstances the Vice-
President, Academic and Provost and the
Dean/University Librarian, after consultation with a Department/School, may appoint an acting Chair/Director for a period
of up to four
(4) months, consistent with Article 9.20 –
Term of Office of Chairs/Directors and Article
9.30 – Removal from Office of
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 213

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Chairs/Directors.
9.15.14 Abbreviated Selection Process
In many selection processes, it is apparent at step 4 (Article 9.15.4 above) that a strong consensus has emerged for the
selection of one (1) candidate. In that event, the Selection
Committee may proceed directly to step 8
(Article 9.15.8 above) of the procedure. If at least two (2) Members object to the abbreviated selection process, then the
Committee shall follow the full procedure.
ARTICLE 9.20 – TERM OF OFFICE OF
CHAIRS/DIRECTORS
9.20.1 The term of office for Chairs/Directors shall normally be for three (3) years, renewable by
Department/School selection per Article 9.15
– Selection of Chairs/Directors.
9.20.2 Should Chairs/Directors not be able to carry out their duties for four (4) months or less, the
Chairs/Directors shall make provision for the take-over of their duties in consultation with the Department/School and
Dean/University
Librarian.
9.20.3 If the absence is for a period of longer than four (4) months, the Chairs/Directors shall relinquish her/his title and a
new
Chair/Director shall be selected according to the procedures set out in Article 9.15 –
Selection of Chairs/Directors.
ARTICLE 9.25 – TEACHING LOAD REDUCTIONS
AND STIPENDS FOR CHAIRS/DIRECTORS
9.25.1 (a) The Chair/Director shall be entitled to a six (6) credit teaching load reduction during each calendar year served
as
Chair/Director. For
Departments/Schools with twenty-five
(25) or more full-time Members and employees (as defined in Article 9.25.2 below), Chairs/Directors shall receive an
additional three (3) credit course reduction. Where the Dean has assigned a full teaching load with the agreement of the
Member, an overload payment (or proportion thereof) will be made in lieu thereof. Where the
University Librarian has assigned a greater than normal workload with the agreement of the Member, an overload
payment (or proportion thereof) will be made.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 214

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
(b) The Chair/Director may voluntarily waive these entitlements, in full or in part.
9.25.2 The Chair/Director will be entitled to an annual stipend for each full year served. Portions of a year will be
pro-rated. An acting Chair/Director shall receive a pro-rated stipend in lieu of the
Chair/Director for each full month served in excess of the first month. The stipend shall be based on the number of
full-time teaching/librarian Members in the
Department/School and the number of other full-time equivalent employees (secretaries, technical staff, etc.) who report
to the
Chair/Director. For purposes of administration of this Article, the Chair/Director shall indicate to the Dean/University
Librarian as of
September 1 of each year the category under which she/he should be compensated.
Changes occurring after September 1 shall be reflected in the following year. If the
Dean/University Librarian agrees with the category under which a Chair/Director is to be compensated, the
Dean/University Librarian will forward this information to the Vice-
President, Academic and Provost. If the
Dean/University Librarian does not agree with the category and the disagreement cannot be resolved, the Vice-President,
Academic and
Provost will rule on the matter. The ruling of the Vice-President, Academic and Provost shall not be grievable.
9.25.3 Full-time teaching/librarian Members and other full-time employees (compensation per year):
One to nine (1 – 9) July 1st, 2017 $2,284
July 1st, 2018 $2,320
July 1st, 2019 $2,360
Ten to nineteen (10 – 19) July 1st, 2017 $3,299
July 1st, 2018 $3,352
July 1st, 2019 $3,409
Twenty to twenty-nine (20 – July 1st, 2017 $4,314
29) July 1st, 2018 $4,383
July 1st, 2019 $4,457
Thirty and over (30 – ) July 1st, 2017 $5,329
July 1st, 2018 $5,414
July 1st, 2019 $5,506
9.25.4 In lieu of compensation, the Chair/Director may elect to receive the whole or part of the
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 215

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 stipend in the form of an equivalent enhancement to the professional allowance.
The Chair/Director will indicate her/his intentions in this matter by September 1 of each year.
9.25.5 In addition to the above compensation, the
Chair/Director shall be entitled to a credit of one (1) year toward her/his sabbatical for a completed three (3) year term.
ARTICLE 9.30 – REMOVAL FROM OFFICE OF
CHAIRS/DIRECTORS
9.30.1 Proceedings for the removal of the
Chair/Director may be initiated by:
(a) A written complaint to the
Dean/University Librarian specifying the reasons for the complaint, signed by at least a majority of the full-time faculty of
the Department/School, excluding those on leave and the
Chair/Director herself/himself. The
Dean/University Librarian shall investigate the situation and offer her/his services to resolve the matter. If the attempt is
unsuccessful, the Dean/University Librarian will forward the written complaint together with her/his report to the Vice-
President, Academic and Provost. or
(b) A written complaint by the
Dean/University Librarian to the Vice-
President, Academic and Provost specifying the grounds for the complaint. The grounds for such complaints should
normally be related to
Articles 9.10 – Duties of Chairs/Directors and Article 5.15 – Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of Academics.
9.30.2 The Vice-President, Academic and Provost shall invite the Chair/Director and the
Department/School to discuss the complaint. Following an adequate investigation, the Vice-President, Academic and
Provost may request the Chair/Director to relinquish their office. If the Chair/Director are not requested to relinquish their
office the
Department/School or the Dean/University
Librarian may request initiation of procedures under Article9.30.3 (c) below.
9.30.3 If the Chair/Director does not voluntarily resign as Chair/Director:
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 216

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
(a) The Vice-President, Academic and
Provost is empowered to suspend that individual as Chair/Director. Once suspended, the Member retains all other rights
and responsibilities as defined in this Collective Agreement.
(b) The Vice-President, Academic and
Provost shall instruct the
Dean/University Librarian to appoint an
Acting-Chair/Director in consultation with the Department/School in accordance with Article 9.15 –
Selection of Chairs/Directors and shall forward the complaint to the President in the form of an appeal.
(c) The President shall create an ad hoc committee to investigate the complaint and shall conduct its investigation in
accordance with statutory requirements. As a result of the committee's investigation, the
President shall rule on the question of removal from office.
(d) The decision of the President shall be final, non-grievable and binding on all parties.
REDUNDANCY AND FINANCIAL EXIGENCY
ARTICLE 10.10 – REDUNDANCY
10.10.1 For the purposes of this Article, the declaration of a state of redundancy by the
Employer shall mean that the number of
Members employed in a particular
Department/School(s) must be reduced. The
Employer agrees that no procedures other than those specified in this Article will be used to deal with redundancies as
defined in Article
10.10.3 below. It is understood that the term redundancy does not apply to limited term appointments that carry no
implication of renewal or continuation beyond the stated term in accordance with Article 5.20 –
Appointment and Renewal.
10.10.2 The Employer shall declare a state of redundancy by sending a written notice to the
Union and to the Vice-President, Academic and Provost that it has approved a resolution for one of the reasons outlined
in Article
10.10.3 below. With this notice, the Employer shall submit a detailed report specifying the reasons why the redundancy is
justified and the exact magnitude of the reduction believed
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 217

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 to be necessary.
10.10.3 A declaration of redundancy by the Employer may be initiated in one of two (2) ways:
(a) Senate may resolve to terminate a Faculty,
Department/School or program for reasons other than Financial Exigency. For the purpose of this Article, a program is
defined as a course of study previously approved by the Senate and leading to a degree or a diploma. Should the
program involve more than one Faculty or
Department/School, the plural should be understood in the following Articles. If the
Employer resolves to approve Senate's decision, then a program redundancy shall be declared.
(b) The Vice-President, Academic and Provost may make a submission to the Employer that a particular
Department(s)/School(s) has (have) a larger number of Members than necessary to fulfil its (their) program and service
teaching requirements in the light of student demand. Such a redundancy shall be known as a workload redundancy. The
Employer agrees that it will not declare a workload redundancy if such an action will result in insufficient academic
personnel for that
Department(s)/School(s) to continue to offer a viable program(s). The onus shall be on the
Employer to show that the proposed reductions are consistent with normal workloads as defined in Article 5.40 –
Academic Workload and that the proposed reductions will not create an inequitable workload for the
Department(s)/School(s) affected by the redundancies.
10.10.4 Redundancies may be justified only for bona fide academic reasons and/or on the grounds of insufficient student
demand. When insufficient student demand is used as a justification, such lack of demand must be demonstrable over a
period of at least three
(3) years and projections into the future must not indicate any appreciable increase in this student demand.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 218

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
10.10.5 As a result of the Employer's declaration, a
Redundancy Committee shall be formed. This
Committee shall hold its first meeting within fifteen (15) days of receipt by the Union of the
Employer's notice as specified in Article
10.10.2 hereof. Within ten (10) days of receipt of that notice, the Union shall forward to the
Vice-President, Academic and Provost the names of three (3) Members who shall serve on the Redundancy Committee.
10.10.6 The Redundancy Committee shall include the following:
(a) Three (3) Members chosen by the
Union,
(b) Three (3) individuals named by the
Employer,
(c) The Vice-President, Academic and
Provost as non-voting Chair.
10.10.7 Within sixty (60) days of its first meeting, the
Redundancy Committee shall make its final report to the Employer (with a copy to the
Union). The Employer shall make no new academic or administrative appointments nor shall the Employer order the
reduction or redistribution of the actual number of full-time
Members of the Bargaining Unit, until the
Redundancy Committee has made its final report or until the time limit of sixty (60) days stated in this Article has expired,
whichever comes first.
10.10.8 It shall be the responsibility of the
Redundancy Committee in consultation with the Vice-President, Academic and Provost, the Dean/University Librarian and
the
Faculty/Library Personnel Committee to recommend who, among the Members of the
Department(s)/School(s) under consideration, shall be affected by redundancy.
10.10.9 Keeping in mind that the continuing academic function assigned to the Department/School is of the highest
priority, the Redundancy
Committee shall consider the following steps in the following order:
(a) Non-renewal of limited term appointments within the
Department/School.
(b) Non-renewal of two (2) year probationary contracts within the
Department/School.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 219

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
(c) Non-renewal of contracts of Members within the Department/School on three (3) year probationary contracts.
(d) Removal of a tenured Member from the
Department/School.
10.10.10 If the Redundancy Committee decides that
Members with tenure, or on a three (3) year probationary contract will be affected by
Redundancy pursuant to Article 10.10.9 hereof, it shall include, in its final recommendation to the Employer, a list of
administrative and academic areas to which the Members could be transferred, with or without a year's retraining,
considering their academic and professional qualifications.
10.10.11 If the Employer approves a resolution to act on the Redundancy Committee's recommendation that a Member
be declared redundant, then the Employer shall send the
Member a written notice of its resolution. This notice shall also contain an offer to the tenured Member of the following
options:
(a) Voluntary early retirement if the
Member is age fifty-five (55) or more.
(b) Transfer in whole or in part to another
Department/School for which the
Member is academically qualified or could become qualified with a year's retraining if the transfer can be effected by one
(1) of the following means:
(i) Filling a vacancy
(ii) Non-renewal of a limited term contract
(iii) Non-renewal of a two (2) year probationary contract
(iv) Non-renewal of contract of
Members on three (3) year probationary contract in the
Department/School to which the tenured Member is to be transferred.
(c) Transfer to an appropriate administrative vacancy in the
University.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 220

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
(d) Termination of employment with severance pay.
(e) Any other alternative that may be implemented in the future with the mutual consent of the two Parties.
Any of the above options shall be implemented in accordance with the terms of this Article. All proposed transfers to
another
Department/School must have the approval of the Vice-President, Academic and Provost. If the offer is to transfer one (1)
component of the Member's workload (this component restricted to either teaching or research) to another academic area,
such offer shall include a statement of the duties of that
Member and a method of weighing the
Member's evaluation for merit based on these special arrangements.
If the Employer cannot offer at least one (1) of paragraphs 10.10.11 (b) or (c) above, it shall offer to keep the Members in
their present position until such time as it can offer them one (1) of paragraphs 10.10.11 (b) or (c) above unless Article
10.10.16 below applies.
10.10.12 Notwithstanding Article 5.20 – Appointment and Renewal, Members with a two (2) year, initial probationary
appointment can be refused the second probationary appointment for reasons of redundancy in accordance with
Articles 10.10.9 or 10.10.11 above. In such instances, the Members shall receive notice by December 15 of the academic
year in which their contract comes up for renewal. A written notice of non-renewal shall be sent to the Members in which
redundancy shall be clearly stated as the reason for non-renewal.
10.10.13 Notwithstanding Article 5.20 – Appointment and Renewal and Article 5.60 – Tenure
Evaluation Procedures, Members who are on a three (3) year probationary appointment can be refused a renewal of their
appointment and/or tenure for reasons of redundancy in accordance with Articles 10.10.9 or 10.10.11 above. In such
instances, the Members shall receive notice by December 15 of the academic year in which their contract comes up for
renewal. A written notice shall be sent to the Members in which redundancy shall be clearly stated as the reason for
non-renewal and/or refusal to grant tenure. They shall be given severance pay in accordance with
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 221

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Article 10.10.18 hereof as well as recall rights in accordance with Article 10.10.18 below.
10.10.14 Tenured Members who accept a transfer to another academic area in whole or in part, shall retain their rank as
well as all pre- existing employment rights. If such a transfer requires retraining, the Members shall be granted leave to a
maximum of one (1) year at one hundred percent (100%) salary plus benefits. Any tuition fees connected with the
retraining shall be paid by the University.
10.10.15 Tenured Members who accept a transfer to an administrative position in accordance with
Article10.10.11 (c) hereof cease to be
Members of the Bargaining Unit on the date that the transfer becomes effective. Members transferred to an administrative
position shall not be dismissed for a period of five (5) years for reasons other than just cause and shall retain for this
period the full rights of Members of this Union, to grieve dismissal for cause. Such Members shall not have their pay
decreased as a result of the transfer but they shall receive only the basic percentage increase to salary scale and no
increments until the normal salary level for their administrative position has reached their own. For a period of five (5)
years from the date of their appointment to the administrative position, the Members shall have first right of refusal of any
academic vacancy within
Laurentian for which they are judged by the
Vice-President, Academic and Provost to be academically competent.
10.10.16 Where a redundancy results from the termination of a program as per Article10.10.3
(a) above and when all transfer provisions have been exhausted, the Employer may lay- off a tenured Member provided
that those
Members who are at least forty-five (45) years of age, have tenure and in respect of whom the sum of years of seniority
from the effective date of tenure plus age equals fifty-five (55) shall be exempt from lay-off.
Costs associated with any arbitration arising out of lay-off shall be distributed in accordance with Article 11.15 – Arbitration
Procedure. The usual burden of proof shall
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 222

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 apply.
10.10.17 Groups and/or individuals who are selected for redundancy may grieve their selection
(under Article 11.10 – Grievance Procedure) on the grounds of bias or procedural error, as well as on the grounds that the
criteria for selection have been applied in a manner which is discriminatory or is in bad faith. This right to grieve includes
the right to challenge the validity of the redundancy but not the right to challenge the Employer's authority to initiate
Redundancy procedures.
Tenured Members who wish to remain in the employ of the University and who have been offered transfer but do not wish
to accept the offer must grieve this transfer within thirty (30) days of receipt of the offer. If the Arbitration
Board concludes that the Members' refusal is well founded, the Members retain their original positions. If the Arbitration
Board concludes that the Members' refusal are not well founded or that another suitable transfer is available, then the
Members must accept the transfer within thirty (30) days of receiving a copy of the decision or else the Members'
employment shall be terminated. The effective date of notice shall be the date that the arbitrator's report is received by the
Members. The Members shall retain recall and notice of termination rights but shall lose their rights to all severance
payments and benefits.
10.10.18 All Members who are on tenured or three (3) year probationary appointments, and whose appointments are
terminated pursuant to this
Article shall have rights as set out hereafter:
(a) (i) Twelve (12) months' notice in writing or any equivalent combination of notice plus salary followed by
(ii) Six (6) months' salary plus one
(1) month's salary for each year as a full-time employee provided that no Member on a three (3) year probationary
appointment receives less than nine (9) months' salary and no tenured Member receives less than eighteen (18) months'
salary.
All payments under this Article shall be based on the Members' total regular salary including the University's
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 223

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 contribution to pension and other benefit plans for their final full academic year of
service at the
University. In no case shall the number of months' salary paid under this Article exceed the time remaining until the
normal retirement age of the
Member.
(b) First right of refusal of all academic vacancies within Laurentian University, for which they have academic competence
as judged by the Vice-
President, Academic and Provost in consultation with the
Department/School to which the individual is to be appointed for a period of three (3) years for a Member on a three (3)
year probationary appointment and five (5) years for a tenured Member from the effective date of termination. Individuals
who accept such positions shall return to the University at the rank they held when their appointments were terminated,
with full recognition for years of service at
Laurentian. Disputes arising out of these recall procedures are referable to the grievance and arbitration process set out in
this Collective
Agreement.
Individuals who are recalled pursuant to this Article shall have up to thirty
(30) days to accept such recall offer, and shall terminate their alternative employment and take up the offered post, as
soon as they are contractually able to do so but in no instance later than six (6) months after accepting the recall offer.
(c) Reasonable efforts by the Employer to assist a laid-off Member in obtaining suitable alternative employment including
the use of professional assistance as well as access to
University resources.
(d) Reasonable access to library, laboratory and computer facilities subject to the agreement of the
Dean/University Librarian concerned until suitable alternative employment is secured or for three (3) years in the case of a
Member on a three (3) year
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 224

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 probationary appointment or for five (5) years in the case of a tenured Member if
suitable alternative employment has not been secured.
(e) Eligibility for themselves and their dependants for exemption from tuition and Physical Education fees until suitable
alternative employment is secured or for three (3) years in the case of a Member on a three (3) year probationary
appointment or for five (5) years in the case of a tenured Member if suitable alternative employment has not been
secured.
10.10.19 Nothing in this Article shall limit the total amount of severance benefits that a tenured
Member might privately negotiate with the
Employer.
10.10.20 All grievances submitted under the terms of this Article shall go directly to arbitration in accordance with Article
11.15 – Arbitration
Procedure. Unless stated otherwise in this
Article, within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the written notice containing the decision which the Members wish to grieve,
the Members must give notice in writing to the Employer of their intention to submit that decision to
Arbitration.
Note: Master Lecturers with permanency will be treated in the same category as tenured faculty and
Master Lecturers without permanency shall be treated in the same category as probationary faculty.
ARTICLE 10.15 – FINANCIAL EXIGENCY
10.15.1 The Board of Governors and the Union agree that the first duty of the University is to ensure that its academic
priorities remain paramount, particularly with regard to the quality of instruction, library service and research, and the
preservation of academic freedom.
10.15.2 For the purposes of this Article, Financial
Exigency shall be defined as substantial and recurring deficits, which threaten the long-term solvency of the University as
a whole.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 225

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
10.15.3 Reductions in academic staff for reasons of financial exigency shall occur only in extraordinary circumstances,
and only then after efforts to alleviate the financial crisis by economies in all other segments of the budget have been
undertaken and after all reasonable means of improving the
University's revenues have been exhausted.
10.15.4 Members may be laid off in accordance with this Article only in the event that a state of financial exigency has
been both declared and confirmed pursuant to the procedures contained in this Article.
10.15.5 In the event that the Employer considers that a financial exigency exists, within the meaning of Article 10.15.2
above, it may give notice of such a belief. As of the date of such notice the procedures specified in this Article shall apply,
and no new appointments may be made to either the academic or administrative staff complement.
10.15.6 Within two (2) days of giving notice of its belief that a financial exigency exists, the Board of
Governors shall forward to the Union all financial documentation relevant to the alleged state of financial exigency.
10.15.7 Within fifteen (15) days of the notice specified in Article 10.15.5 above, the Parties shall establish a Financial
Commission which will consider the alleged financial exigency and either (a) confirm it (under whatever conditions it
chooses to impose) or (b) reject it.
10.15.8 The Financial Commission shall be chosen as is an Arbitration Board per Article 11.15 –
Arbitration Procedure. It is agreed that in this instance no Member of the Financial
Commission shall be a government official, and the Minister of Labour, if requested to appoint a Chair, shall choose a
person who is not in the employ of a government. Decisions of the Financial Commission under this Article shall be final
and binding on all Parties. In this regard the Financial Commission shall be deemed to be an Arbitration Board.
10.15.9 The onus of proof shall be on the Employer to establish to the satisfaction of the Financial
Commission that a state of financial exigency exists within the meaning of this Article.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 226

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
10.15.10 Within seven (7) days of the choice of a Chair, the Financial Commission shall meet and invite and consider
submissions on the
University's financial condition. Inter alia it shall consider:
(a) Whether the University's financial position (as evidenced from the total budget and not just the academic or salary
components thereof) constitutes a bona fide budgetary crisis such that deficits projected by generally accepted accounting
principles are expected to continue for more than two
(2) fiscal years;
(b) Whether in view of the primacy of academic goals at the University the reduction of academic staff is a reasonable
type of cost saving;
(c) Whether all reasonable means of achieving cost-saving in other areas of the University budget have been explored
and exhausted;
(d) Whether all reasonable means of improving the University's revenue position have been explored and exhausted;
(e) Whether every effort has been made to secure further assistance from the provincial government;
(f) Whether enrolment projections are consistent with a proposed reduction in the academic staff complement;
(g) Whether all means of reducing the academic staff complement including voluntary early retirement, voluntary
resignation, voluntary reduced workload, voluntary redeployment and leaves, etc. have been exhausted, and
(h) Whatever other matters it considers relevant.
10.15.11 The Financial Commission will normally be expected to hand down its Report and deliver a copy to the Employer
and to the Union within sixty (60) days of its first meeting. If the
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 227

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Commission finds that a state of financial exigency does not exist, no reductions of academic staff for reasons of financial
exigency may take place. If the Commission finds that a financial exigency does exist, its
Report shall specify the amount of reduction required, if any, in the budgetary allocation to salary and benefits for
Members of the
Bargaining Unit. Any reduction in the budgetary allocation for academic salaries and benefits may be made conditional
upon the further exploration of alternative cost saving measures by the University, and the
Commission shall remain seized of its jurisdiction in this matter pending the satisfactory exhaustion of all such specified
alternatives. Within five (5) days of receipt of the Report of the Financial Commission, the
Parties shall meet and confer with respect to its implications.
10.15.12 Pursuant to the ruling of the Financial
Commission, the Board of Governors may reduce the budgetary allocation for salaries and benefits of Members of the
Bargaining
Unit but such reduction shall not exceed the amount of the reduction specified by the
Commission. The decision of the Board of
Governors shall be taken and written notice thereof sent to the Financial Commission within two (2) weeks of receipt of
the notice mentioned in Article 10.15.11 above.
10.15.13 Within twenty (20) days the Financial
Commission shall apportion among the
Faculties, Library and similar units, the reduction in the budgetary allocation for salaries and benefits of the Members of
the
Bargaining Unit. Whenever possible, such reductions will be divided in a proportionate amount among the Faculties and
Library within the University unless there is a clear and substantial reason for doing otherwise.
10.15.14 Within thirty (30) days, the Faculties/Library through their respective Faculty/Library
Councils shall apportion the budgetary reduction among the Departments/Schools within the Faculty/Library and
determine which among its Members are to be laid off. Whenever possible such reductions will be divided among the
units within a
Faculty/Library in a proportionate amount unless there is a clear and substantial reason for doing otherwise.
10.15.15 The principal criteria in the termination/lay-off of Members within a Department, School or
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 228

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 similar unit shall be:
(a) The possession of qualifications suitable for the continuing function of the Faculty, School, Department or
Library.
(b) Quality of performance in teaching and research or scholarly activity where applicable.
(c) The possession of qualifications suitable for transfer with or without retraining to another academic or administrative
position within the
University.
(d) Contributions to the wider community.
10.15.16 Within a Department/School, a tenured
Member shall not be terminated in preference to a non-tenured Member. For tenured
Members, the more senior Member, in terms of service determined from the date at which tenure at the University
became effective shall be retained unless, after applying the above criteria, there is a clear and substantial reason for
doing otherwise.
10.15.17 Those Members who are at least forty (40) years of age, have tenure and in respect of whom the sum of years
of seniority from the effective date of tenure plus age equals at least fifty-five (55) shall be exempt from lay-off until all
other academic staff within the
Faculty/Library and not included in this category have been laid off.
10.15.18 Should the Faculty/Library Council fail to determine within thirty (30) days who among its Members is to be laid
off, it shall be the responsibility of the Deans/University Librarian to apportion the budgetary reduction within their
Faculty/Library. Should the
Deans/University Librarian fail to make such a decision within seven (7) days, the Financial
Commission shall make the apportionment of the budgetary reduction.
10.15.19 Members who are selected for lay-off under this Article shall be provided with written notice of the reasons for
their selection. Lay- offs under this Article shall not be treated or
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 229

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 recorded as dismissals for cause.
10.15.20 After the selection of the Members who are to be laid off, but prior to the implementation of such lay-offs, the
Employer shall make every reasonable effort to secure positions elsewhere in the University, including administrative
positions, for those Members who are to be laid-off. Members who accept alternative academic employment retain all
pre-existing employment rights, including credit for sabbaticals, salaries and pensions. Members who accept alternative
employment shall be given the opportunity to retrain for a period of up to one (1) year for their new duties. The Employer
shall pay any related tuition fees and full salary to the
Member during this retraining period.
10.15.21 Groups and/or individuals who are selected for lay-off by a Faculty/Library Council or
Dean/University Librarian, may grieve their selection under Article 11.10 – Grievance
Procedure and Article 11.15 – Arbitration
Procedure on the ground of bias or procedural error, as well as on the grounds that the criteria for lay-off have been
applied in a manner that is discriminatory or is in bad faith. The right to grieve does not include the right to challenge the
validity of the financial exigency.
10.15.22 All tenured and probationary Members whose appointments are terminated pursuant to this
Article shall have rights as set out hereafter:
(a) (i) The University shall be obliged to offer twelve (12) months’ notice or twelve (12) months' salary in lieu of notice
followed by;
(ii) One (1) month's salary for each year as a full-time employee provided that no tenured
Member shall receive less than twelve (12) month's salary.
All payments under this Article shall be based on the Members' total salary including the University's contribution to
pension and other benefit plans for their final full academic year of service
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 230

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 at the University. In no case shall the number of months' salary paid under this Article
exceed the time remaining until the normal retirement age of the
Member.
(b) First right of refusal of all academic vacancies within Laurentian University, for which they have academic competence
as judged by the Vice-
President, Academic and Provost in consultation with the
Department/School to which the individual is to be appointed for a period of three (3) years from the effective date of
termination. Individuals who accept such positions shall return to the
University at the rank they held when they were laid off, with full recognition for years of service at
Laurentian. Disputes arising out of these recall procedures are referable to the Grievance and Arbitration process set out
in this Collective
Agreement.
Individuals who are recalled pursuant to this Article shall have up to thirty
(30) days to accept such recall offer, and shall terminate their alternative employment and take up the offered post, as
soon as they are contractually able to do so but in no instance later than six (6) months after accepting the recall offer.
(c) Reasonable efforts by the Employer to assist a laid-off Member in obtaining alternative employment including the use
of professional assistance as well as access to University resources.
(d) Reasonable access to Library, laboratory and computer facilities subject to the agreement of the
Dean/University Librarian concerned until suitable alternative employment is secured or for three (3) years whichever is
less.
(e) Eligibility for themselves and their dependants for exemption from tuition and Physical Education fees until suitable
alternative employment is secured or for three (3) years, whichever is less.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 231

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
10.15.23 Notice of academic vacancies shall be deemed to be good and sufficient if they are sent by the Board of
Governors to the
Member's last known address with a copy to the Union. Any Member who fails to reply within thirty (30) days or who
refuses a permanent position offered under this Article shall lose all rights of recall.
10.15.24 A Member accepting a permanent position at
Laurentian University will no longer receive severance pay.
10.15.25 Any vacancy that occurs and that cannot be filled through the recall procedures in this
Article will be filled in accordance with the normal hiring practices.
10.15.26 Tenured Members, whose appointments are terminated while they are on leave as in
Article 3.2, shall have the same rights as other tenured Members in accordance with the terms of this Article.
10.15.27 Laid off Members who are recalled shall repay any portion of the allowance specified in
Article 10.15.22 above which exceeds their entitlement had they continued to occupy their normal position.
10.15.28 The cost of the Financial Commission established under this Article shall be borne by the Employer.
GRIEVANCE AND ARBITRATION
ARTICLE 11.10 – GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
11.10.1 There shall be no discrimination, harassment or coercion, of any kind, practised against any persons involved in
these procedures.
11.10.2 The Union and the Employer agree to make every reasonable effort to settle all grievances in a prompt, just and
equitable manner.
11.10.3 Definitions
(a) Grievance: A "grievance" shall mean any difference arising from the interpretation, application, administration or
alleged violation of the Collective Agreement, including any question as to whether a matter is arbitrable in accordance
with the
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 232

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Labour Relations Act, 1995.
(b) Grievor: The grievor is either the
Union which initiates a grievance against the Employer on behalf of a
Member or group of Members or itself, or the Employer which initiates a grievance against the Union, an individual
Member or a group of
Members except as otherwise prohibited in this Collective Agreement.
(c) Individual Grievance: An individual grievance is a grievance initiated by the Union on behalf of an individual
Member.
(d) Group Grievance: A group grievance is a grievance initiated by the Union on behalf of a group of Members.
(e) Policy Grievance: A policy grievance is a grievance by a Union which may involve a matter of general policy or of
general application of the Collective
Agreement.
(f) Union Grievance: A Union grievance is a grievance which directly affects the
Union.
(g) Employer Grievance: An Employer grievance is a grievance initiated by the Employer.
(h) "Working days": Working days shall mean Monday through Friday, excluding Recognised and other
Holidays identified in Article 7.10 –
Recognized and Other Holidays including the customary December –
January recess, as well as the months of July and August.
11.10.4 The time limits specified in this Article may be extended by mutual agreement by the Parties.
Moreover, an arbitrator shall have the power to waive time limits. The amended time limits must be specified in writing.
11.10.5 Notwithstanding Article 11.10.2 above, a grievor shall have recourse to the grievance procedures set out below if
such grievor is convinced that no settlement can be reached by informal means, unless otherwise specified in this
Collective Agreement.
11.10.6 All communications required under these procedures shall be in writing and shall be
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 233

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 delivered by registered mail or with written proof of receipt.
11.10.7 No technical violation or irregularity occasioned by clerical, typographical or technical error in the written
specification of the grievance shall prevent the substance of a grievance from being heard and judged on its merits.
11.10.8 All Parties to a grievance shall be bound by and shall promptly implement all decisions arrived at under the
procedures described in this Article.
11.10.9 Applicability of Grievance Procedures
(a) The following decisions will not be subject to grievance:
(i) Non-renewal of term appointments as per Article
5.20 – Appointment and
Renewal;
(ii) The award of a merit increment as per Article 8.25 – Merit
Increments.
(b) The following decisions will be subject to grievance only in the case of allegations of either violations of academic
freedom, significant procedural irregularities or discrimination:
(i) The non-renewal of a probationary appointment when the Vice-President, Academic and Provost confirms a negative
recommendation of a Faculty
Personnel Committee;
(ii) The denial of a first application for promotion to a particular rank when the Vice-President,
Academic and Provost confirms a negative recommendation of a
Faculty Personnel Committee
(and the denial of a second application for promotion where the two (2) applications are made in consecutive years);
(iii) The denial of an early application for tenure when the
Vice-President, Academic and
Provost confirms a negative recommendation of a Faculty
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 234

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Personnel Committee;
(iv) The decision of the Vice-
President, Academic and
Provost, regarding academic workload as per Article5.40.6
(d) of Article 5.40 – Academic
Workload.
(c) Grievances concerning Renewal as per Article 5.20 – Appointment and
Renewal, concerning tenure as per
Article 5.60 – Tenure Evaluation
Procedures, and concerning promotion as per Article 5.65 – Promotion
Procedures, shall proceed directly to arbitration as set forth in Article 11.15 –
Arbitration Procedure.
(d) Grievances concerning dismissal shall proceed directly to Step 2 – Formal
Grievance Procedure as set forth in this Article.
11.10.10 Step 1 – Informal Grievance Procedure
The Union and the Employer agree to make reasonable efforts to settle grievances promptly by informal and amicable
means.
Thus, the grievor shall first attempt to get the matter under question resolved by informal means within thirty (30) working
days of the date upon which the grievor had notice of the event or decision giving rise to the grievance.
This would normally involve contacting the
Dean/University Librarian concerned before bringing the matter to the Vice-President,
Academic and Provost. However, this does not preclude making the Vice-President,
Academic and Provost aware of such a grievance, nor does it preclude a grievance from being addressed to the
Vice-President,
Academic and Provost initially or early on in the process.
11.10.11 Step 2 – Formal Grievance Procedure
(a) The grievor shall present a notice of grievance in writing to the Vice-
President, Academic and Provost in the case of a Member, or to the
President of the Union in the case of the Employer, within thirty (30) working days of the date upon which the grievor had
notice of the event or decision giving rise to the grievance. The notice of grievance
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 235

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 shall specify the matter(s) in dispute, the Article(s) alleged to have been violated, and
the remedy sought.
(b) In the event of a grievance concerning renewal, tenure or promotion as per
Article11.10.9 (c) above, the notice of grievance shall also include the name of the grievor’s appointee to the
Arbitration Panel.
(c) No later than fifteen (15) working days following the receipt of the grievance, the Employer representative shall meet
with the Union representative. The
Parties shall make every reasonable attempt to resolve the grievance.
(d) If the grievance is resolved at this stage, such settlement shall be reduced to writing and countersigned by the Union
representative and the
Employer representative within fifteen
(15) working days of the meeting at which the settlement was reached.
(e) In the event that the Union representative and the Employer representative cannot resolve the grievance within fifteen
(15) working days of the meeting(s) specified in
Article11.10.11 (c), the Employer representative shall forward in writing to the Union representative the reasons for
denying the grievance.
ARTICLE 11.15 – ARBITRATION PROCEDURE
11.15.1 (a) Failing settlement and/or timely response under the foregoing grievance procedure, any grievance may then
be submitted to arbitration as hereinafter provided under its own distinct arbitral procedure. If no written request for
arbitration is received within thirty (30) working days after the decision of the Vice President,
Academic and Provost or the Union
President under Step 2 – Formal
Grievance Procedure of the grievance procedure is given, the grievance shall be deemed to have been abandoned.
(b) When either Party requests that any matter be submitted to Arbitration as provided in this Article, it shall make such
request in writing addressed to the other Party of this Collective
Agreement, and at the same time
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 236

Collective Agreement 2017-2020 appoint a nominee. Within fifteen (15) working days thereafter, the other
Party shall appoint its nominee, provided however, that if such Party fails to appoint its nominee as herein required, the
Minister of Labour for
Ontario shall have the power to make such appointment upon application thereto by the Party invoking the arbitration
procedure. The two (2) nominees shall attempt to agree upon a chairperson of the Arbitration Board.
If they are unsuccessful in agreeing upon such a chairperson within a period of twenty (20) working days of the
appointment of the second nominee, they shall request the
Minister of Labour for Ontario to appoint a chairperson.
(c) The time limits specified in this Article may be extended by mutual agreement by the Parties. However, the thirty (30)
working day time limit set out in
Article11.15.1 (a) above referring a grievance to arbitration shall not be waived and/or extended pursuant to the Labour
Relations Act, 1995.
Moreover, an arbitrator shall be bound by this provision.
(d) Saturdays, Sundays, Recognised and other Holidays identified in Article 7.10
– Recognized and Other Holidays including the customary December –
January recess as well as the months of July and August are not to be counted in the time limits set out in this
Article.
11.15.2 No person may be appointed to the Arbitration
Board who has been involved in an attempt to negotiate or settle the grievance.
11.15.3 The Arbitration Board shall not be authorized to make any decisions inconsistent with the provisions of this
Collective Agreement, nor to alter, modify, add to, or amend any part of this
Collective Agreement.
11.15.4 No matter may be submitted to arbitration which has not been properly carried through all requisite steps of the
Grievance Procedure hereinbefore set out unless otherwise agreed to in writing between the Parties.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 237

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
11.15.5 The proceedings of the Arbitration Board will be expedited by the Parties hereto, and the decision of the majority
and, where there is no majority, the decision of the chairperson will be final and binding upon the Parties hereto, and the
Employee or Employees concerned.
11.15.6 Each of the Parties hereto will bear the expenses of the nominee appointed by it, and the Parties will share
equally the fees and expenses, if any, of the chairperson of the
Arbitration Board.
11.15.7 Wherever the term “Arbitration Board” is referred to in this Collective Agreement, the
Parties hereto may mutually agree, in writing, to substitute a mutually agreeable arbitrator for the Arbitration Board at the
time of reference to arbitration and the other provisions referring to Arbitration Board shall appropriately apply.
STRIKES AND LOCKOUTS
ARTICLE 12.10 – STRIKES AND LOCKOUTS
12.10.1 The University and the Union hereby agree that there shall not be, during the currency of this Collective
Agreement, any lockout by the
University or any strike by Members of the
Union.
12.10.2 A Member shall not be disciplined per Article
5.75 – Disciplinary Measures for refusing to cross a picket line on campus which has been established in full compliance
with existing laws. The Employer may, however, dock such a Member's salary by one three hundred and sixty-fifth (1/365)
for each day lost.
VALIDITY, DURATION AND CONTINUANCE OF THE
COLLECTIVE AGREEMENT
ARTICLE 13.10 – VALIDITY OF THE COLLECTIVE
AGREEMENT
13.10.1 In the event of any of the provisions of this
Collective Agreement or any practices established hereby being contrary to the provisions of any applicable law
hereinafter enacted, this Collective Agreement shall not be deemed to be abrogated, but shall be amended so as to
conform with the regulations of any such law.
ARTICLE 13.15 – DURATION AND CONTINUANCE OF
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 238

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
THE COLLECTIVE AGREEMENT
13.15.1 This Collective Agreement shall come into effect upon ratification by the Parties and shall continue in effect to
June 30, 2020 and shall continue from year to year thereafter unless either Party gives the other Party notice in writing,
not more than one hundred and fifty
(150) days but not less than one hundred and twenty (120) days prior to the thirtieth (30th) of
June in 2020 or in any year following June
30, 2020, that it desires to amend or terminate this Collective Agreement.
13.15.2 If notice is given as provided in Article 13.15.1 above, the two Parties to this Collective
Agreement shall meet within ten (10) days.
13.15.3 During any period of negotiations, this
Collective Agreement shall remain in force. If a new Collective Agreement has not been ratified by both Parties by June
30 of the year in which notice has been given as provided for in Article 13.15.1 above, then all the provisions of this
Collective Agreement shall continue in force (but these provisions shall not constitute a Collective Agreement) until either:
(a) A new Collective Agreement has been ratified by both Parties. or
(b) Following conciliation, a strike or lockout is declared in accordance with the Ontario Labour Relations Act.
13.15.4 At least ten (10) days before the termination of this Collective Agreement, a separate memorandum which shall
continue in force thereafter, shall be signed by the Parties to the effect that in the event of a strike or lockout,
(a) Members whose ongoing research requires access to University facilities in order to prevent irreparable damage to
research facilities (such as loss of live and/or decomposable materials) shall be allowed access to the facilities usually
associated with such research. Such access will be limited to maintaining the facilities and shall not be used to continue
the research. Such Members shall give notice in writing of their access requirements to the President of the
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 239

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Union and to their Deans/University
Librarian. Such notice will normally be given at least ten (10) days before the date of termination of the Collective
Agreement.
(b) The Union will assume the costs of maintaining Members' eligibility in the
University's hospital, extended health and dental care plans.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 240

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
APPENDIX A: LETTER OF UNDERSTANDING -
Faculty Members employed by Laurentian
University on Campuses outside of Sudbury
BETWEEN:
THE LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY
ASSOCIATION
AND
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY OF SUDBURY
RE: Faculty Members employed by Laurentian
University on Campuses Outside of Sudbury.
WHEREAS the University is now engaged in providing jointly-run programs with Georgian College of Applied Arts and
Technology, on multiple campuses;
AND WHEREAS such initiatives are likely to occur with greater frequency;
AND WHEREAS the expansion of the University’s programs contributes to the health of the University, and provides
greater opportunities for faculty
Members;
THEREFORE THE PARTIES AGREE AS
FOLLOWS:
1. All Faculty Members employed by Laurentian
University to teach courses for degree credit shall be included in the Bargaining Unit represented by the
Union, if they would be included in the Bargaining
Unit were they teaching in Sudbury. Persons affected by this will have departmental status in the academic unit at
Laurentian to which their appointment elsewhere belongs, and that academic unit will be involved in the appropriate
tenure and promotion processes according to the Collective
Agreement. However, the terms of the agreement will be interpreted as site specific, such that, for example, exigency and
seniority Articles will apply to the campus on which the program is being offered.
2. In the event of a closure of an academic unit or program the tenure-stream Members affected by the decision on
campuses outside Sudbury shall have the right either of transfer to the same Unit or program at the Sudbury campus with
the same rights and privileges as they held at the outside campus or, in the event there are no such positions, of
severance equivalent to the remedy provided for in
Article 10.15.22 as applicable.
REVISION DATED AT Sudbury, Ontario, this 14th day of September 2014.
“Rizwan Haq”
Dr. Rizwan for Laurentian University Faculty Association
“Hermann Falter”
Dr. Hermann Falter for Laurentian University of Sudbury
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 241

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
APPENDIX B: STANDARD LETTER OF
APPOINTMENT
(The actual letter may contain additional information)
DAY/MONTH/YEAR
Dr. XXX
Address
Dear Dr. XXX
On the recommendation of the Dean of (FACULTY) /
University Librarian and the (DEPARTMENT/SCHOOL) we are pleased to offer you an appointment at Laurentian
University.
The terms of the offer are shown on the enclosed form. If they are acceptable, please sign and return one copy.
A copy of the Collective Agreement with the Laurentian
University Faculty Association can be found at the following website: http://www.lufapul.ca/ColAgree.htm
This offer is conditional on your being legally entitled to work in Canada. Please call me if you have any questions
concerning your entitlement to work in Canada.
Please note in the enclosed offer the requirement that you furnish proof of educational credentials. All appointments at
Laurentian University are conditional upon this requirement being fulfilled. The requirement can be met by you bringing to
the Vice-President, Academic and Provost the original degree or diploma for photocopying, or by the educational
institution submitting directly to my office either a transcript or a certification that the stated degree or diploma has been
granted.
This offer remains open until (DATE). If you require more time to consider this offer, please contact me as soon as
possible and in any event before the offer expires.
If you have any questions, please do not hesitate to contact me.
Sincerely,
Vice-President, Academic and Provost
Enclosures
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 242

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
OFFER OF EMPLOYMENT TO
(Subject to changes in the new Collective Agreement)
DR. XXX,
DATE
1. DEPARTMENT/SCHOOL. This appointment is in the Department/School of XXX.
2. TYPE OF APPOINTMENT. This is a XXX appointment.
3. EFFECTIVE DATE. The effective date of this appointment will be Day/Month/Year. End date if applicable.
4. RANK. This appointment will be at the rank of
XXX based on your qualifications and years of experience according to Article 5.10 –
Academic Qualifications Guidelines.
5. SALARY. Your starting salary will be XXX per annum based on XXX years of university experience and XXX years of
other experience relevant to your discipline as well as other factors affecting faculty recruitment in your field. Your salary,
benefits and other provisions will be adjusted according to any new Collective Agreement between the
Employer and the Union.
6. LENGTH OF PROBATIONARY PERIOD. The normal probationary period is five (5) academic years in length.
(Because of your previous experience at Laurentian, the normal probationary period may be reduced by xxx years. Please
confirm in writing should you wish to accept that reduction.) You will be considered for tenure in the fifth (5th) academic
year (academic year 20x/20xx) following the effective date of this appointment. If tenure is not granted, your appointment
will terminate at the end of that academic year (XXX). If tenure is granted, it will be effective on the first (1st) day of the
following academic year (day/month/year).
You may apply and be considered for tenure in the fourth academic year (academic year
XXX) following the effective date of this appointment per Article 5.60.3 (a) of Article
5.60 – Tenure Evaluation Procedures.
7. RENEWAL. As per Article 5.20.22 of Article
5.20 – Appointment and Renewal, in
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 243

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
September 20XX, you will undergo an initial contract renewal which if successful will be followed by a further two (2) year
probationary appointment.
8. SABBATICAL LEAVE. As per Article 7.25 –
Sabbatical Leaves, you will be eligible to apply for a sabbatical leave of one (1) year to commence after six (6) academic
years of service, less XXX years of credit that you have been granted, in a full-time academic capacity for service.
9. RESPONSIBILITIES. Your responsibilities are outlined in Article 5.15 – Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of Academics and will include teaching and academic guidance of students, scholarly activity,
and service to the University.
10. BILINGUAL REQUIREMENT. As per Article
3.30 – Bilingualism, you are required to become passively bilingual as a condition of tenure. If needed, the Employer will
provide language training and in any year you take such training you will be relieved of the requirement to participate in
university governance beyond the Department/School level.
11. RELEASE TIME. Your normal teaching load will be reduced by one (1) course (six (6) credit equivalent) during your
first (1st) year (if applicable).
12. PHYSICAL AND MENTAL ILLNESS. You are eligible for sick leave up to a maximum of six
(6) months at full salary from the date of disability due to accident or illness, for each separate disability cause as per
Article 7.55 –
Physical and Mental Illness.
13. LONG-TERM DISABILITY. You will be required to join the Long-Term Disability insurance plan which provides
benefits after six (6) months of uninterrupted total disability.
14. LIFE INSURANCE INCLUDING
ACCIDENTAL DEATH AND
DISMEMBERMENT. You will be required to join the life insurance plan. You may supplement your coverage by
purchasing optional life insurance, the premiums for which are fully paid by the Employee.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 244

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
15. EXTENDED MEDICAL AND DENTAL CARE
PLANS. You will be eligible to join the
Extended Medical and Dental Care Plans.
16. PENSION. You are required to join the pension plan effective your date of appointment.
17. VACATION. You will be entitled to an annual vacation of twenty-five (25) days during your first (1st) year and
thereafter as per Article
7.15 – Vacation.
18. TUITION FEE EXEMPTION. This policy covers a person employed full-time by the
University from the first (1st) day of her/his appointment and her/his spouse and dependent children from the same date.
19. START-UP GRANT. You will be provided with a start-up research/creative activity grant of
XXX. These funds must be used and expended in accordance with the University policy on start-up grants.
20. PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
EXPENDITURES. You will be provided XXX for the first (1st) year for your professional development expenditures and
thereafter as per Article 6.45 – Professional Development
Expenditures.
21. MOVING EXPENSES. The Employer will reimburse claims at the rate of one hundred percent (100%) to a maximum
of five thousand dollars ($5,000). Moving expenses paid to a new Member constitute a loan made by the University. This
loan will be retired when the Member has completed three (3) years of continuous service to the University, each year
being equivalent to one-third (1/3) of the reimbursement of the loan.
22. LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY
ASSOCIATION. This appointment is subject to a Collective Agreement between the Board of Governors of Laurentian
University and the
Laurentian University Faculty Association.
The current Collective Agreement is for a term ending 2011. Monthly dues to the Union will be deducted from your salary.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 245

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
23. PROOF OF STATED EDUCATIONAL
QUALIFICATIONS. It is University policy that all persons appointed to positions of both an academic and non-academic
nature, part-time or full-time, furnish proof of their stated educational credentials to the Vice-President,
Academic and Provost. This offer of employment is conditional upon this requirement being fulfilled by you in respect of
your latest degree.
24. OTHER TERMS. a) Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, this probationary appointment will terminate
automatically if you are not granted a tenured appointment. Laurentian
University makes no promises concerning the possibility of further or other appointments, including a tenured
appointment.
25. CONSISTENCY WITH COLLECTIVE
AGREEMENT. This offer is made pursuant to the Collective Agreement and the Collective
Agreement shall prevail in case of any inconsistency between the terms of this Offer and the terms of the Collective
Agreement.
Vice-President, Academic and Provost Date
I hereby accept the conditions of employment set out in this document.
NAME Date c.c.: Dean
Financial Services
Human Resources
Institutional Research
Laurentian University Faculty Association
Payroll and Benefits Centre
DATED AT Sudbury, Ontario, this 21st day of
September 2008.
“DAVID LEADBEATER”
Dr. David Leadbeater for Laurentian University Faculty Association
“HARLEY D’ENTREMONT”
Dr. Harley d’Entremont for Laurentian University of Sudbury
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 246

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
APPENDIX C: Departmental/School Assessment
Contract Renewal
Date :
Name of candidate :
Department:
The recommendation below includes both majority and minority opinions, if any.
In assessing the applicant’s progress toward meeting the requirements for tenure outlined in paragraphs
5.60.6 of Article 5.60 – Tenure Evaluation Procedures, the committee shall comment on each aspect of these criteria.
(Article 5.20.22 (d))
Pursuant to Articles 5.15, 5.50 and 5.60, we have made the following assessment :
1. Teaching a) Assessment of teaching, the quality of which is satisfactory as determined based on the teaching dossier
and approved course evaluations as mandated by the Collective Agreement. Student evaluations, in numerical or written
form, shall not be admissible as evidence if such evaluations are more than five (5) years old. If the applicant has faced
problems in teaching, the committee will look for evidence that he/she has recognized the problems, has taken steps to
improve, and has made some improvements.
(Articles 5.10.2 (c) (ii), 5.70.9 and 5.60.3 (c) (i))
Satisfactory _______ Unsatisfactory ________
Reasons:
Or
Professional Librarianship / Archives Management
When considering librarians/archivists, professional service and library/archives management skills shall be substituted for
"teaching". (Article 5.40).
Satisfactory ______ Unsatisfactory _________
Reasons: b) Assessment of the candidate’s teaching dossier.
The nature and scope of past teaching activities shall be taken into account. (Clauses 5.50.3 and 5.60.3 (c)
(i)).
Satisfactory ______ Unsatisfactory _________
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 247

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Reasons:
2. Scholarly activity
A record of satisfactory scholarly activity as defined in
Article 5.15 – Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of
Academics. The applicant shall show progress in independent research or creative activity. (Article
5.60.3 (c) (ii))
Satisfactory_______ Unsatisfactory ________
Reasons :
3. University Governance and Administrative
Duties
A record of contributions to University governance and administrative duties as set out in Article 5.15 –
Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of Academics.
(Article 5.60.3 (c) (iii))
Satisfactory ______ Unsatisfactory _______
Reasons :
RECOMMENDATION
In assessing the applicant’s progress toward meeting the requirements for tenure, the committee should comment on the
rate of progress shown during the initial probationary period.
On the basis of the assessment above, we recommend _______/do not recommend
________the candidate for contract renewal.
Vote : In favour _____ Opposed ______
Members : Signature :
_______________ _______________
_______________ _______________
_______________ _______________
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 248

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
APPENDIX D: Departmental/School Assessment
Tenure
Date :
Name of candidate:
Department:
The recommendation below includes both majority and minority opinions, if any.
Pursuant to Articles 5.15, 5.50 and 5.60, we have made the following assessment :
1. Teaching a) Assessment of teaching, the quality of which is satisfactory as determined based on the teaching dossier
and approved course evaluations as mandated by the Collective Agreement. Student evaluations, in numerical or written
form, shall not be admissible as evidence if such evaluations are more than five (5) years old. If the applicant has faced
problems in teaching, the committee will look for evidence that he/she has recognized the problems, has taken steps to
improve, and has made some improvements.
(Articles 5.10.2 (c) (ii), 5.70.9 and 5.60.3 (c) (i))
Satisfactory _______ Unsatisfactory ________
Reasons : b) Assessment of the candidate’s teaching dossier.
The nature and scope of past teaching activities shall be taken into account. (Clauses 5.50.3 and 5.60.3 (c)
(i)).
Satisfactory ______ Unsatisfactory _________
Reasons:
Or
Professional Librarianship / Archives Management
When considering librarians/archivists, professional service and library/archives management skills shall be substituted for
"teaching". (Article 5.40).
Satisfactory ______ Unsatisfactory _________
Reasons:
2. Scholarly activity
A record of satisfactory scholarly activity as defined in
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 249

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Article 5.15 – Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of
Academics. The applicant shall show progress in independent research or creative activity. (Article
5.60.3 (c) (ii))
Satisfactory _______ Unsatisfactory ________
Reasons:
3. University Governance and Administrative
Duties
A record of contributions to University governance and administrative duties as set out in Article 5.15 –
Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of Academics.
(Article 5.60.3 (c) (iii))
Satisfactory _______ Unsatisfactory ________
Reasons:
RECOMMENDATION
The committee shall be flexible in assessing stronger performance in some areas against weaker performance in other
areas as set out in Article 5.50.3 of Article 5.50 – Assessment of a Member’s
Performance. However, in no instance shall it recommend tenure for an applicant if teaching performance is judged
mostly unsatisfactory or if the applicant is not engaged in a program of scholarly activity. (Article 5.60.3 (c) (v))
On the basis of the assessment above, we recommend _______/do not recommend
________the candidate for tenure.
Vote : In favour _____ Opposed ______
Members : Signature :
_______________ _______________
_______________ _______________
_______________ _______________
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 250

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
APPENDIX E: Departmental/School Assessment
Promotion to the rank of Assistant
Professor/Librarian
Date :
Name of candidate:
Department
The recommendation below includes both majority and minority opinions, if any.
Pursuant to Articles 5.10.2 (b), 5.15 and 5.50, we have made the following assessment :
1. Experience
At the time the promotion to the rank of Assistant
Professor/Librarian becomes effective, the candidate will have at least five (5) years of satisfactory performance of the
Member’s responsibilities and duties. (Article 5.10.2 (b) (ii))
Yes _______ No _______ Date of appointment :
________
2. Teaching a) Assessment of teaching, the quality of which is satisfactory as determined based on the teaching dossier
and approved course evaluations as mandated by the Collective Agreement. Student evaluations, in numerical or written
form, shall not be admissible as evidence if such evaluations are more than five (5) years old. (Articles 5.10.2 (b) (ii) and
5.70.9)
Satisfactory _______ Unsatisfactory________
Reasons : b) Assessment of the candidate’s teaching dossier.
(Clauses 5.50.3).
Satisfactory ______ Unsatisfactory _________
Reasons:
Or
Professional Librarianship / Archives Management
When considering librarians/archivists, professional service and library/archives management skills shall be substituted for
"teaching". (Article 5.40).
Satisfactory ______ Unsatisfactory _________
Reasons:
3. Scholarly activity
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 251

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Demonstrated evidence of scholarly activity (as per
Article 5.15 – Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of
Academics).
Satisfactory _______ Unsatisfactory________
Reasons :
4. University Governance and Administrative
Duties
Evidence of contributions to the governance of the
University through membership on appropriate bodies.
(Article 5.15.26)
Satisfactory _______ Unsatisfactory ________
Reasons:
5. Exceptional contributions in one area which compensate for lesser contributions in another. a) Teaching/ (Articles
5.50.4) b) University Governance and Administrative Duties
(Article 5.50.4)
RECOMMENDATION
On the basis of the assessment above, we recommend _______/do not recommend
________the candidate for rank of Assistant
Professor/Librarian.
Vote : In favour _____ Opposed ______
Members : Signature :
_______________ _______________
_______________ _______________
_______________ _______________
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 252

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
APPENDIX F: Departmental/School Assessment
Promotion to the rank of Associate
Professor/Librarian
Date :
Name of candidate :
Department:
The recommendation below includes both majority and minority opinions, if any.
Pursuant to Articles 5.10.2 (c), 5.15 and 5.50, we have made the following assessment :
1. Experience
At the time the promotion to Associate
Professor/Librarian becomes effective, the candidate will have at least five (5) years of full-time teaching and/or research
in a university or an institution of equivalent level or at least five (5) years of professional experience judged to be relevant
for teaching at the university level. (Article 5.10.2 (c) (iv))
Yes _______ No _______ Date of appointment :
_________
Previous experience, if any :
2. Teaching a) Assessment of teaching, the quality of which is satisfactory as determined based on the teaching dossier
and approved course evaluations as mandated by the Collective Agreement. Student evaluations, in numerical or written
form, shall not be admissible as evidence if such evaluations are more than five (5) years old. (Articles 5.10.2 (c) (ii) and
5.70.9)
Satisfactory _______ Unsatisfactory ________
Reasons: b) Assessment of the candidate’s teaching dossier.
(Clauses 5.50.3).
Satisfactory ______ Unsatisfactory _________
Reasons:
Or
Professional Librarianship / Archives Management
When considering librarians/archivists, professional service and library/archives management skills shall be substituted for
"teaching". (Article 5.40).
Satisfactory ______ Unsatisfactory _________
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 253

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Reasons:
3. Scholarly activity
Evidence of scholarly activity (as per Article 5.15 –
Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of Academics) that is of good quality. (Article 5.10.2 (c) (iii))
Satisfactory _______ Unsatisfactory ________
Reasons:
4. University Governance and Administrative
Duties
Evidence of contributions to the governance of the
University through membership on appropriate bodies.
(Article 5.15.26)
Satisfactory_______ Unsatisfactory ________
Reasons:
5. Exceptional contributions in one area which compensate for lesser contributions in another. a) Teaching (Articles 5.50.4
and 5.10.2 (c) (v)) b) University Governance and Administrative Duties
(Article 5.50.4)
RECOMMENDATION
On the basis of the assessment above, we recommend _______/do not recommend
________the candidate for promotion to the rank of
Associate Professor/Librarian.
Vote : In favour _____ Opposed______
Members: Signature :
_______________ _______________
_______________ _______________
_______________ _______________
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 254

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
APPENDIX G: Departmental/School Assessment
Promotion to the rank of Full Professor/Librarian
Date :
Name of candidate:
Department:
The recommendation below includes both majority and minority opinions, if any.
Pursuant to Articles 5.10.2 (d), 5.15 and 5.50, we have made the following assessment :
1. Experience
At the time the promotion to Full Professor/Librarian becomes effective, the candidate will have at least ten
(10) years of full-time teaching and/or research in a university or an institution of equivalent level or at least ten (10) years
of professional experience judged to be relevant for teaching at the university level. (Article
5.10.2 (d) (iv))
Yes _______ No _______ Date of appointment:
__________
Previous experience, if any:
2. Teaching a) Assessment of teaching, the quality of which is satisfactory as determined based on the teaching dossier
and approved course evaluations as mandated by the Collective Agreement. Student evaluations, in numerical or written
form, shall not be admissible as evidence if such evaluations are more than five (5) years old. (Articles 5.10.2 (d) (ii) and
5.70.9)
Satisfactory_______ Unsatisfactory________
Reasons : b) Assessment of the candidate’s teaching dossier.
(Clauses 5.50.3).
Satisfactory ______ Unsatisfactory _________
Reasons:
Or
Professional Librarianship / Archives Management
When considering librarians/archivists, professional service and library/archives management skills shall be substituted for
"teaching". (Article 5.40).
Satisfactory ______ Unsatisfactory _________
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 255

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Reasons:
3. Scholarly activity
Evidence of scholarly activity (per Article 5.15 – Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of Academics) throughout the Member’s career and after her/his promotion to
Associate Professor/Librarian that ranks as a recognized contribution to the scholarly field or professional activity
concerned. (Article 5.10.2 (d) (iii))
Satisfactory_______ Unsatisfactory________
Reasons :
4. University Governance and Administrative
Duties
Evidence of contributions to the governance of the
University through membership on appropriate bodies.
(Article 5.15.26)
Satisfactory _______ Unsatisfactory ________
Reasons :
5. Exceptional contributions in one area which compensate for lesser contributions in another. a) Teaching (Articles 5.50.4
and 5.10.2 (c) (v)) b) University Governance and Administrative Duties
(Article 5.50.4)
RECOMMENDATION
On the basis of the assessment above, we recommend _______/do not recommend
________the candidate for promotion to the rank of
Full Professor/Librarian.
Vote : In favour_____ Opposed______
Members : Signature :
_______________ _______________
_______________ _______________
_______________ _______________
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 256

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
APPENDIX H: Departmental/School Assessment
Merit Increment
Date :
Name of candidate:
Department :
The recommendation below includes both majority and minority opinions, if any.
Pursuant to Articles 5.15, 5.50, 8.25 and 5.10.2 (d) or
4.20, as applicable, we have made the following assessment :
1. Eligibility
Full Professor/Librarian _______
Master Lecturer_______
2. Teaching a) Assessment of teaching, the quality of which is satisfactory as determined solely by the method of teaching
evaluation mandated by the Collective
Agreement. Student evaluations, in numerical or written form, shall not be admissible as evidence if such evaluations are
more than five (5) years old.
(Articles 5.10.2 (d) (ii) and 5.70.9)
For Full Professors :
Performance is clearly above the level for promotion to the rank of Full Professor (Article 8.25.5)
For Master Lecturers :
The candidate has demonstrated consistently good teaching (Article 8.25.5)
Yes _____ No ______
Reasons : b) Assessment of the candidate’s teaching dossier
(Article 5.50.3)
Satisfactory _______ Unsatisfactory ________
Reasons :
Or
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 257

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Professional Librarianship / Archives Management
When considering librarians/archivists, professional service and library/archives management skills shall be substituted for
"teaching". (Article 5.40).
Satisfactory ______ Unsatisfactory _________
Reasons:
3. Scholarly activity
Evidence of scholarly activity (per Article 5.15 – Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of Academics) throughout the Member’s career and after her/his promotion to
Associate Professor/Librarian that ranks as a recognized contribution to the scholarly field or professional activity
concerned.
(Article 5.10.2 (d) (iii))
For Full Professors/Librarians/Archivists :
Performance is clearly above the level for promotion to the rank of Full Professor
Yes _____ No ______
Reasons :
4. University Governance and Administrative
Duties. Evidence of contributions to the governance of the University through membership on appropriate bodies. (Article
5.15.26)
For Full Professors:
Performance is clearly above the level for promotion to the rank of Full Professor/Librarian
Yes _____ No ______
Reasons :
5. Exceptional contributions in one area which compensate for lesser contributions in another. a) Teaching (Articles 5.50.4
and 5.10.2 (c) (v)) b) University Governance and Administrative Duties
(Article 5.50.4)
RECOMMENDATION
On the basis of the assessment above, we recommend _______/do not recommend
________the candidate for a merit increase.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 258

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Vote : In favour_____ Opposed______
Members : Signature :
_______________ _______________
_______________ _______________
_______________ _______________
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 259

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
APPENDIX I: FPC/FFPC/LPC Assessment Review
Form
Name of candidate_____________________________
Does the FPC/FFPC/LPC endorse the assessment and recommendation of the Department/School
Assessment Committee?
Yes ______ No _______
In each of the categories below and with reference to the criteria cited in Article 5.15 – Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of Academics, please provide a comprehensive and substantive rationale for your vote:
A) Teaching or Professional Librarianship/Archives
Management
B) Scholarly Activity
C) University Governance and Administrative Duties
2. Does the FPC/FFPC/LPC endorse the assessment and recommendation of the Dean/University
Librarian? Yes ______ No _______
In each of the categories below and with reference to the criteria cited in Article 5.15 – Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of Academics, please provide a comprehensive and substantive rationale for your vote:
A) Teaching or Professional Librarianship/Archives
Management
B) Scholarly Activity
C) University Governance and Administrative Duties
Summary
Based on our review of the assessments by the
Department/School Assessment Committee and the
Dean/University Librarian, we advise the Vice-
President (Academic) and Provost to support ______/ oppose ________ the candidate’s application.
Rationale:
Article 5.50.7(m)
The Member may make written representations to the Vice-President, Academic and Provost within ten (10) working days
of the date on which the
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 260

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
Faculty Personnel Committee forwards to the
Member a copy of its assessment letter to the Vice-
President, Academic and Provost.
The Chair of the Faculty Personnel Committee shall forward the assessment letter to the Vice-
President, Academic and Provost, with a copy to the applicant, by December 15 for renewal and tenure applications, and
by February 15 for promotion, with the exception of applications for promotion to Full Professor/Librarian.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 261

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
APPENDIX J: LETTER OF UNDERSTANDING -
Equitable distribution of workload
BETWEEN:
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY
ASSOCIATION
AND
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY OF SUDBURY
RE: Equitable distribution of workload
During 2017 collective bargaining negotiations, LUFA sought a reduction of the teaching load to twelve (12) credits, with
the goal of achieving a fair and equitable workload across Faculties. The parties therefore agreed that the matter of
equitable teaching load would not form part of the renewal collective agreement but committed to a process to make
progress on the matter during the life of the agreement. In that spirit, recognizing that no outcome is binding on either
party except as may be mutually agreed in writing, the University and the Union commit to engaging in collegial, open and
transparent discussions. The parties agree to begin these discussions in a timely manner to allow for teaching load
reductions, if any, to take effect July 1, 2020.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 262

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
APPENDIX K: LETTER OF UNDERSTANDING-
McEwen School of Architecture workload
BETWEEN:
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY
ASSOCIATION
AND
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY OF SUDBURY
RE: McEwen School of Architecture workload
The Parties agree that all full-time members in the
McEwen School of Architecture shall be required to teach two (2) studio courses per academic year, normally one per
term. In exceptional circumstances, that number may vary with the member’s consent. The parties agree that the
workload shall not exceed current practices for teaching assignment in the
School.
Full-time members appointed through tenured, probationary, or limited term appointments shall be required to teach, in
addition to the (2) studio courses, one (1) three (3) credit course per year or equivalent.
Full-time members appointed to Master Lecturer positions shall be required to teach, in addition to the two (2) studio
courses, nine (9) credits of courses per year or equivalent.
The term “studio courses” refers to the following:
ARCH 1505, ARCH 1515, ARCH 2505, ARCH 2515,
ARCH 3505, ARCH 3515, ARCH 4505, ARCH 4515,
ARCH 5505, ARCH 5515, ARCH 5525, ARCH 5555,
ARCH 5565.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 263

Collective Agreement 2017-2020
APPENDIX L: LETTER OF UNDERSTANDING -
Pension Plan Contributions
BETWEEN:
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY
ASSOCIATION
AND
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY OF SUDBURY
RE: Pension Plan Contributions
During the 2017 collective bargaining negotiations, the
University sought an increase to employee pension contributions from LUFA members while providing a fully offsetting
salary increase, with the goal of achieving a fair and equitable cost-sharing of current service costs. It was agreed that the
parties would benefit from an opportunity to consider the July 1, 2017
Pension Plan Valuation, due to be finalized in or about
December 2017. The parties therefore agreed that the matter of pension contributions would not form part of the renewal
collective agreement but committed to a process to make progress on the matter during the life of the agreement. In that
spirit, recognizing that no outcome is binding on either party except as may be mutually agreed in writing, the University
and the Union commit to engaging in collegial, open and transparent discussions. The parties agree to begin these
discussions in a timely manner to allow for pension and salary increases, if any, to take effect July 1, 2018.
LUFA Collective Agreement 2017-2020 FINAL Feb 8 english ocr Page 264

ARTICLE 0.1 - TITLE
The official title of this Agreement shall be "The Collective Agreement
between the Faculty Association and the Board of Governors of Laurentian
University". Hereinafter, this title shall be referred to as the Agreement.
ARTICLE 0.2 - OFFICIAL LANGUAGES
1. Both the English and French versions of the Collective Agreement shall
be official and definitive versions. Both parties may use either the English
or the French version in any proceedings arising out of the Collective
Agreement, and shall apply the version of the Collective Agreement in
which formal grievance/arbitration proceedings were initiated.
2. The Parties agree to cooperate to have the Collective Agreement
translated within ninety (90) days from the version negotiated at the table
into the other official language of Canada. The Parties will share equally
in the cost of the translation.
ARTICLE 0.3 - DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Agreement the following words shall bear the
definition indicated herein except as otherwise provided in this Agreement:
1. Laurentian University of Sudbury Act shall mean the Laurentian
University of Sudbury Act, being Chapter 151 of the Statutes of Ontario for
the year 1960 as amended by Chapter 154, 1961-62.
2. University shall mean Laurentian University of Sudbury.
3. Employer or Board shall mean the Board of Governors of Laurentian
University, or its designate, as provided for in the Laurentian University of
Sudbury Act.
4. Association or LUFA shall mean the Laurentian University Faculty
Association, certified to be the exclusive Bargaining Agent for the Full-time
and Sessional Faculty of the University pursuant to the various relevant
decisions of the Ontario Labour Relations Board.
5. Parties shall mean the Board of Governors of Laurentian University of
Sudbury and the Laurentian University Faculty Association.
6. Senate shall mean the Senate of Laurentian University of Sudbury as
constituted in the Laurentian University of Sudbury Act.
7. President shall mean the President of Laurentian University of Sudbury
or the President's designate.
8. Vice-President (VP, Academic) shall mean the Vice-President,
Academic (Anglophone Affairs) or Vice-President, Academic (Francophone
Affairs) as appropriate or their respective designates.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 1

9. Dean shall mean the Dean of a Faculty duly appointed or the Dean's
designate.
10. Faculty shall mean any body identified as such by the Senate of
Laurentian University of Sudbury, and with the approval of the Board in
accordance with the Laurentian University of Sudbury Act.
11. Director of the Library shall mean the officer in charge of the
University Library.
12. Chairperson/Director shall mean the Chairperson/Director of any
teaching department/professional school/library department.
13. Academic unit head shall include the Chairperson/Director of a
Department/Professional School, and the head of any other unit, which the
parties have agreed, is equivalent to a teaching/library department;
14. Member or Employee shall mean a Member of the bargaining unit for
whom the Association is certified as the exclusive bargaining agent except
where the context requires otherwise.
15. Unless specified in relevant Articles within the Agreement, the terms
Professional Librarians and professional librarianship shall mean
Professional Librarians and Archivists, and professional librarianship and
archival management, respectively.
16. Sessional Member shall mean a Member hitherto a Member of the
Bargaining Unit designated by the 28 March 1994 OLRB Certificate and
now a Member of this Merged Bargaining Unit.
17. Academic Year shall mean the twelve (12) month period commencing
July 1 and ending June 30 of any given year and includes the Fall, Winter,
and Spring Terms as per the University Calendar, even where the Spring
Term extends beyond June 30.
18. Session shall mean either or both Terms of the Winter Session (from
September to December or from January to April) or the Spring Session
(from April to July) as per the Laurentian University Calendar.
19. Course credits shall mean the number of credits assigned to a course by
the University Senate and as indicated in the Laurentian University
Calendar.
20. Course credits that contribute toward Sessional Seniority shall mean
credits arising from courses for which the Sessional Instructor's name
appears on the Laurentian University course masters, grade reports, teaching
evaluations, or letters of appointment and excludes courses offered by the
Centre for Continuing Education, except for non-distance education courses
that are offered on the Laurentian campus.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 2

ARTICLE 0.4 - COPIES
1. The Board shall, within 30 days after the respective bargaining
committees have approved the translation of the Collective Agreement,
provide at no charge, a copy of this Agreement in both official languages
to each Member of the Association, and upon request to individuals who
were employed as Sessional Instructors during the previous three years.
2. The Board shall also issue, at no charge, a copy of the Agreement to
each new appointee, whose appointment falls within the Bargaining Unit, no
later than with the offer of appointment.
3. The cost of producing any additional copies shall be borne by the party
that requests them.
ARTICLE 1.10 - PURPOSE OF THE AGREEMENT
1. It is the purpose of this Collective Agreement:
a) To set forth terms and conditions relating to employment,
remuneration and benefits.
b) To maintain a harmonious relationship between the Association
and the Board by providing amicable means for settling differences
which may arise between them from time to time.
c) To encourage the efficient and responsible conduct of the life and
work of the University.
d) To foster a working environment which motivates Members to
achieve the objects and purposes of the University.
ARTICLE 1.20 - THE OBJECTS AND PURPOSES OF THE
UNIVERSITY
The objects and purposes of the University, as set out in the Act, are:
1. The advancement of learning and the dissemination of knowledge; and
2. The intellectual, social, moral and physical development of its members
and the betterment of society.
The parties agree to cooperate in the pursuit of these objects and purposes.
ARTICLE 1.21 - ACADEMIC FREEDOM
1. In addition to their legal rights as citizens, Members have the right to
academic freedom. Academic freedom is the right to search for truth,
knowledge and understanding and to express freely what one believes. The
University as an institution and the community of its scholars have a duty to
protect and defend the search for knowledge and truth by all that enquire,
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 3

teach, offer professional library service and learn under its auspices. They
shall be free to carry out research and to publish its results; free to teach, to
discuss and to criticise both the University and the wider society it serves.
However, in doing so they shall maintain the proper academic tradition of
reasonable discussion.
2. Academic freedom entails the obligation to base all research and
teaching on a responsible search for truth and knowledge. It requires the
fulfilment of responsibilities to other members of the teaching and learning
community. It requires the acknowledgement of the work of others and the
acceptance of responsibility for one's own beliefs and utterances. Academic
freedom does not confer legal immunity.
3. The Parties agree to safeguard, as far as reasonably possible, the
privacy of information, whether on paper or in electronic form, that is
exclusively personal to and in the possession of, individual Members.
ARTICLE 1.22 - NO DISCRIMINATION
1. The parties agree that there shall be no discrimination, interference,
restriction or coercion exercised or practised with respect to any Member in
regard to salaries, rank, appointment, promotion, tenure, reappointment,
dismissal, leaves, fringe benefits, or any other matter arising from this
Agreement, by reason of age (except for retirement as provided for in this
Agreement), race, language (except where the lack of language competence
would clearly prevent carrying out the required duties), creed, colour,
ancestry, ethnic or cultural background, national origin, political or religious
affiliation or belief, sex, sexual orientation, marital status, family
relationship, personal or social life style or behaviour, clerical or lay status,
physical handicap (except where the physical, emotional or mental condition
would clearly prevent the carrying out of the required duties). The parties
agree, however, that no Members or person acting as an officer of the
University shall take part in formal discussions or vote with respect to the
determination of any term or condition of employment of a member of their
immediate family.
2. The choice of the most competent person for the post as described in a
formally approved job description or a formally approved advertisement will
not constitute discrimination.
3. In the case of the evaluation of candidates for appointment, renewal,
tenure and promotion, the criteria adopted must not systematically
discriminate against members of designated groups and shall be periodically
reviewed to ensure that work done predominantly by members of designated
groups is not undervalued.
4. There shall be no discrimination with respect to any Member arising
from membership or activity in the Association, or from a failure to join or
participate in the Association.
5. This article shall not preclude any action that has as its object the
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 4

equitable representation of designated employment equity target groups
throughout the academic community.
ARTICLE 1.23 - WORKING ENVIRONMENT
1. The Board acknowledges its responsibility to maintain facilities,
services and general working conditions, which support the effective
discharge by Members of their responsibilities as specified in Article 2.00.
The Board may determine the manner in which and the level at which
facilities and services are provided to Members, on the understanding that
the Board will endeavour to maintain reasonable levels of working space,
secretarial and other support services, including telephones, computing,
printing, duplicating and library services, technical services and teaching and
research assistance. The reasonableness of levels of services may be
measured by consideration of the financial resources of the University.
2. On an annual basis all Members, including retirees, upon request, will
be supplied with a photo id. library card at no cost to them except if they
require a replacement for a lost card. The charge for replacement will be $10
per card.
ARTICLE 1.24 - HEALTH, SAFETY AND SECURITY
1. The employer recognises a responsibility to provide an environment
intended to protect the health, safety and security of employees as they carry
out their responsibilities. To that end, the Employer agrees to establish a
Joint Health and Safety Committee, which will independently consider
matters concerning the health and safety of employees and students. This
Committee shall include one representative of all unionised groups in the
University (including LUFA), as well as one representative of the
Science/Engineering Safety Committee and one member from the
Administration with power to co-opt other members.
The Committee's work will include an examination of procedures and
physical facilities brought to its attention, as these relate to health, safety and
security.
2. The Association shall observe and assist in the implementation of rules
adopted to protect the health and safety of employees and to maintain the
security of persons and premises.
ARTICLE 1.25 - BILINGUALISM
1. The University is committed to the fulfilment of its role as a bilingual
institution of higher learning, in accordance with the Laurentian University
of Sudbury Act. The University and the Faculty Association pledge
themselves to the maintenance and promotion of both the English and the
French languages and cultures.
2. Consistent with the commitment stated in paragraph 1, the University
recognises the right of all Members to communicate directly (verbally and in
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 5

writing) with all academic and administrative services of the University in
the official language of their choice for all official transactions.
3. The two parties shall have the right to be heard in either of the official
languages, and to require the translation of any official materials.
4. The two parties agree to make every effort to provide a translation of
non-official documents where either party requires such.
ARTICLE 1.26 - EMPLOYMENT EQUITY
1. Laurentian University and the Laurentian University Faculty
Association support the principle of employment equity as defined by
Provincial and Federal Laws and the Senate/Board approved Policy on
Employment Equity.
2. Employment Equity
a) The parties pledge themselves to work to increase the proportion
of faculty members who are members of the four designated
employment equity groups (women, native people, persons with
disabilities and members of visible minorities) to an equitable level in
each discipline.
b) To determine an equitable proportion of members of the four
designated employment equity groups for each discipline, the Parties
shall consider among other factors the number of doctoral candidates in
Canadian universities as revealed by Statistics Canada data.
ARTICLE 1.30 - RECOGNITION OF THE BARGAINING UNIT
The Board recognises the Association as the exclusive Bargaining Agent for
the Bargaining Unit(s) defined in the OLRB Certificates of 9 July 1979,
28 March 1994, and 31 October 1995 (which are attached as appendixes to
this Memorandum of Agreement) and any amendments to these certificates.
ARTICLE 1.31 - RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES OF THE
ASSOCIATION
1. a) The Board agrees to provide the Association with the use of a
serviced office, in an academic area of the University.
b) The Board agrees to provide to the Association room L-303 (not
including L-305) as a common room for use by Members, Senior
Administrators and their guests.
2. The Association shall have access to the internal postal service of the
University. Normal practice of charging for external mail will apply.
3. The Board shall permit the Association to use University premises as
meeting rooms on the same basis as University organisations.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 6

4. The Board will allow the Association to use University printing,
computer, and audio-visual facilities at the same rate as University users,
subject to availability.
5. The University agrees to continue to extend a monthly account, due
when rendered, to which charges incurred by the Association shall be
debited.
6. The Association may request, prior to May 8 of the preceding academic
year, that Members be relieved by the appropriate Dean/Director of the
Library of up to two-thirds of a teaching workload, or its equivalent in the
case of the Library, during the course of an academic year. Such requests
shall not be unreasonably refused. In any one academic year no more than
three full-course-equivalent reductions will be granted in total.
If, on the recommendation of the Dean/Director of the Library
concerned, a replacement is required to take on the duties of which a
Member has been relieved, the Association will reimburse the University for
payment of the replacement to a maximum of one (1) overload payment for
each full-course-equivalent reduction for which a replacement is required.
7. The President of the Association, or someone designated by the
President of the Association, and a second Member designated by the
President of the Association, shall continue to be non-voting members of the
Board of Governors.
8. The President of the Association, or someone designated by the
President of the Association, shall continue to be a non-voting member of the
Finance Committee of the Board of Governors.
9. The Board agrees to continue current practices with respect to release
time for Association activities provided these practices are known and
reasonable.
10. The Association shall maintain its current representation of one
Member on the University Parking Committee.
11. The President of the Association or someone designated by the
President, and two additional Members designated by the President of the
Association, shall continue to be voting members of the University
Pension Committee. Given the importance of pensions, on substantive
matters, the LUFA Board has the right to ratify the recommendations of
its representatives.
ARTICLE 1.32 - DUES CHECK-OFF
1. No Member shall be required to join the Association as a condition of
employment. Except as hereinafter specified, the Employer shall deduct
once monthly during the term of this Agreement from the salary of each
Member of the bargaining unit monthly dues or other assessments for
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 7

general Association purposes uniformly and regularly payable by a Member
of the Association authorised in accordance with the Constitution and by-
laws of the Association and certified in writing to the Employer by the
Association.
2. At the commencement of the Agreement, the Association shall advise
the Employer in writing of the amount of its regular monthly membership
dues. Thereafter the Association shall advise the University in writing of
any change in the amount of regular monthly membership dues, such notice
to be given at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of such
change. The Association shall limit the change in membership dues to no
more than three times per year.
3. Except as hereinafter specified, the amounts so deducted shall be
remitted to the Association by the 15th of the month following the month in
which the deductions are made together with a list specifying the names of
those Members of the bargaining unit from whose salaries the
aforementioned deductions have been made and the individual amount of
each member's deduction. The Employer shall with the list aforesaid
provide the names of all Members who have ceased to be employees of the
University.
4. The Employer shall deduct from the salary of each Member of the
bargaining unit who obtains an order from the Ontario Labour Relations
Board under section 47 of the Labour Relations Act of Ontario (directing
that the said Member is not required to pay monthly dues or other
assessments to the Association because of his religious conviction or belief)
an amount equal to the monthly dues or other assessments for general
Association purposes uniformly and regularly payable by a Member of the
Association and shall remit said amount on behalf of the said Member to the
University's Scholarship Funds.
5. In the event the Association wrongfully receives dues hereunder on
account of an employee who is not a Member of the Association, or if on
account of a Member of the Association but in excess of the amount
required, the Association agrees to reimburse or credit the employee as the
case may be for the amount so received. The Association shall indemnify
and save harmless the University against any action arising out of the
wrongful deductions of money for Association dues resulting from the
Association's instructions and the refusal of the Association to reimburse the
employee, within 60 days of the lodging of their claim.
6. At the time that Income Tax T4 slips are provided to each Member by
the University, the University shall indicate on the T4 slips or separately in
writing to each Member the deductions from his salary under this article.
ARTICLE 1.33 - EMPLOYMENT OF NON-MEMBERS
1. The Board agrees that, except as otherwise provided for in this article, it
will not employ Non-Members to teach in the programs of/or offer
professional library service in the University. Membership in the bargaining
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 8

unit is defined in Article 1.30 Recognition.
2. Notwithstanding the generality of 1. above, nothing in this Agreement
is intended to prevent the Board from assigning a teaching load to
individuals that are precluded from membership in the Bargaining Unit by
virtue of their position as described in the OLRB Certificates designated in
article 1.30 above. The Association will exercise reason in entering into
Memoranda of Agreement to allow the assignment of occasional teaching
loads to qualified individuals who hold senior administrative posts within the
University and whose official functions could reasonably be deemed to be
inconsistent with Association Membership.
3. As per the OLRB Certificate, Visiting and Exchange
professors/librarians may work outside the bargaining unit.
4. Notwithstanding 3, above, Non-Members of the Bargaining Unit must
not participate in decisions by the unit on personnel matters except as
specified in this agreement.
ARTICLE 1.40 - RECOGNITION OF THE EMPLOYER
1. COMPOSITION
Laurentian University of Sudbury is incorporated under the Statutes of
the Province of Ontario, 1960, Chapter 151 as amended by 1961-62,
Chapter 154.
2. RECOGNITION
The Association recognises that the Board has retained and shall
possess and exercise all rights and functions, powers, privileges and
authority that the Board possessed under the Act of Incorporation prior to the
signing of this Agreement with the Association, excepting only those that are
clearly and specifically relinquished or restricted in this Agreement, or
modified by statute. The Board undertakes that all rights and functions,
powers, privileges and authority shall be exercised in a manner consistent
with the provisions of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 1.41 - CORRESPONDENCE
In conformity with section 113 of the OLRA, except where otherwise
expressly provided in this Agreement, notices required to be given under the
provisions of this Agreement shall be in writing and shall be sufficient either
if addressed to the appropriate recipient and sent by campus mail or Canada
Post, or if delivered to the appropriate recipient personally with a signed
receipt required.
Notices to and official correspondence with the Association shall be
addressed to the attention of the President of the Association or the
President's designate.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 9

Notices to and official correspondence with the Employer shall be addressed
to the Vice-President, Academic.
ARTICLE 1.42 - INFORMATION
1. The parties recognise that their mutual goals stated in Article 1.1 can
only be realised if both parties have access to necessary information required
for effective collective bargaining and the proper administration of this
Agreement. Both parties agree to use professional discretion in dealing with
this information. This information will be provided in hard copy, and where
feasible, on computer diskette.
2. To that end the Board undertakes to provide the Association with the
following, at the times indicated:
a) In October of each year, a list showing the name, rank, salary, and
type of appointment of each Full-time Member of the Bargaining Unit.
For Members designated as ‘On Leave’, the list shall indicate the type
of leave that the Member is on.
b) In October of each year a list of all limited term appointments and
the reasons for the appointment categorised according to Article 2.21
Sections 11a to 11e.
c) In October, February and May of each year a list showing the
name, courses taught on overload/professional library service rendered
and amount of money paid to each Full-time Member of the Bargaining
Unit during the current academic session.
d) In October, February and May of each year a list showing the
name, courses taught on overload/professional library service rendered
and amount of money paid to each Non-Member during the current
academic session.
e) In October of each year a statement of the number of Full-time
Members of the Bargaining Unit that did not expend all of the
professional allowance available to them as provided in Article 4.52,
and the total amount of funds left unexpended as of June 30 of the
previous year.
f) The letters of appointment of all new Full-time Faculty Members
who accept employment with the University subsequent to the signing
of this Collective Agreement by both Parties shall be supplied to the
Faculty Association within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the said
executed letters of appointment.
g) A copy of the contracts issued to all Full-time Faculty Members
who have been granted sabbatical leave or any other kind of leave.
Such contracts shall be supplied to the Faculty Association within
fifteen (15) days after acceptance by the Member.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 10

h) Copyright contracts per Article 4.72.
i) In October of each year, the total salary allocation and median
salary for:
i) Senior administration;
ii) Part-time employees outside the Bargaining Unit by unit;
iii) Any other teaching or research employees outside the
bargaining unit;
iv) Library employees outside the bargaining unit.
j) A copy of the course master and updates to the course master
when they become available.
k) A copy of the University's annual audited financial statements and
supporting schedules, following approval of these by the Board of
Governors.
l) Employment equity data including the number of women and men
applying for each advertised position, the gender, highest degree and
years of experience for each applicant chosen for the interview list.
Such information will be forwarded to the Association by September 30
of each year.
m) The Employer shall provide the Association with the letters of
appointment of all Sessional Instructors who accept employment with
the University subsequent to the ratification of this Collective
Agreement by both parties. Such letters of appointment to be supplied
to the Association within fifteen (15) days of receipt of said executed
letters of appointment.
n) The Employer shall in October, February, and May of each year
provide the Association with a list showing the name, salary,
establishment status, and courses taught that contribute to the Sessional
Seniority of each Member of the Bargaining Unit that is employed
during the current academic session.
o) Copies of advertisements for faculty positions shall be sent to
LUFA once they have been approved by the Office of the Vice
President, Academic.
p) Copies of any mailings forwarded by the Board to Members, to be
sent to the Association at the same time as the general mailing.
3. The Association agrees to provide the Board with:
a) Copies of any mailings made by the Association to all its
Members, to be sent to the Employer at the same time as the general
mailing.
b) Copies of any statements or representations made or to be made
publicly by the Association.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 11

c) An up-to-date copy of the constitution of the Association.
d) An up-to-date list of the Executive of the Association.
4. Each member, who has not previously done so, shall when requested
supply the Personnel Office with one copy of his/her birth certificate (or
other equivalent documentation attesting to the date of birth).
5. It is understood that this section shall not be construed to require either
party to supply any information that is confidential with respect to matters
relating to labour relations.
6. Each party agrees to inform the other party when statistical information
concerning Members is released as required by law or in response to a
request from a government body or agency, and further, to inform the other
party of the nature of the information requested or released. Except when
required by law, the Board agrees not to release any individually identifiable
statistical data in aggregate form concerning Members to any person, body,
agency, and institution without the written consent of the Association.
7. One (1) individual shall be chosen by each party to coordinate the
exchange of information and to act as liaison between the two parties.
8. Nothing in this Article is meant to preclude either side of this
Agreement from making reasonable requests for additional information from
time to time. Both parties agree to fulfil such requests.
ARTICLE 1.43 - JOINT CONSULTATIVE COMMITTEE FOR
THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE AGREEMENT
1. The President of the Association or the President's designate and the
Vice-President, Academic or the Vice-President, Academic's designate shall
act as liaison between the two parties as required by this Agreement as well
as co-ordinate and exchange information as per Article 1.42.
2. When either party deems it advisable, its representative may be
accompanied by one (1) or more advisers.
3. The parties are authorised from time to time to enter into memoranda of
agreement with regard to the Collective Agreement. The parties may from
time to time authorise other representatives, in addition to the Vice-
President, Academic and the President of the Association to sign these
memoranda of agreement.
4. The parties agree to form a Joint Consultative Committee for the
Administration of the Agreement, composed of three (3) representatives of
each party as follows: the President of the Association and the Vice-
President, Academic or their respective designates; one officer of LUFA and
one Dean appointed by the Vice-President, Academic; and one appointee
from each party.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 12

5. The Committee shall attempt:
a) To maintain and develop a spirit of cooperation and mutual respect
between the parties.
b) To facilitate better working relationships between the Board and
the Association and its Members.
c) To discuss, review, and make recommendations to the parties on
matters of concern to either party.
6. The Committee shall meet once in November and once in February and
at other times when deemed useful or necessary by mutual agreement of the
parties.
7. The Committee shall be chaired in alternation by a representative of the
Board and a representative of the Association. The chair shall be responsible
for preparing and distributing the agendas and preparing minutes of
meetings.
8. The Committee shall determine its own procedures subject to the
provision that a quorum shall consist of at least two (2) representatives of
each party.
9. The Committee shall not have the power to add to or to modify the
terms of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 1.50 - EXISTING PRACTICES
1. Prior to modifying or discontinuing any working conditions not
covered by the Agreement but possessed by all Members of the bargaining
unit or by a group thereof, the Board agrees to give notice of such change or
discontinuance to the Association.
2. The Association shall be afforded the opportunity to make a
representation to the Board through the Joint Consultative Committee for the
Administration of the Agreement prior to the implementation of any change
as defined in paragraph 1 of this Article. After such representation, the
Board has the right to proceed providing the change or discontinuance is
urgent and reasonable.
ARTICLE 1.51 - MODIFICATIONS TO THE LEGAL STATUS OF
THE UNIVERSITY
1. Amendment To The Act
Any future proposals by the Board to amend the Laurentian University
of Sudbury Act, 1960 shall be presented to the Legislative Assembly of the
Province of Ontario, after consultation with the Association.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 13

2. Amalgamation, Consolidation, Merger Or Expansion Of The
University
a) In the event of a merger or amalgamation or a transfer of
jurisdiction, the provisions of the Labour Relations Act of Ontario shall
apply, particularly sections 62 and 63.
b) This Agreement shall bind the transferees or assignees of the
University or of the Association.
ARTICLE 2.00 - RIGHTS, RESPONSIBILITIES AND DUTIES OF
ACADEMICS
The Members of the bargaining unit have rights, duties and responsibilities
which derive from their positions as teachers/professional librarians and
scholars working within the University community, and which reflect the
reasonable expectations of the Members, the University community and the
contractual expectations of the Employer.
Members have the right to engage in the following activities:
A. Teaching / Professional Librarianship / Archives Management
B. Scholarly Activity
C. University Governance and Administrative Duties
D. Outside Professional Activities
E. Service to the Community
F. Other Paid Activity
1. Members of the Regular Stream.
Members of the regular stream have responsibilities relating to items
A), B) and C) and are expected to participate actively in items A), B) and C),
although not necessarily in all three in any one given year. A Member's
responsibilities related to item A) shall consist of those teaching or library
duties which are assigned by the Dean/Director of the Library as per Article
2.10 - Academic Workload. A Member's responsibilities related to items B)
and C) are inherent in a Member's status as an academic and thus flow
naturally therefrom. Certain specific duties related to item B) and C) may
also be assigned by the Dean/Director of the Library on an ad hoc basis in
order to ensure a good and proper functioning of the University. A Member's
responsibilities relating to item d), e) and f) are undertaken voluntarily by the
Member.
2. Members of the Alternate Stream.
Members of the alternate stream have responsibilities relating to items
A) and C) and are expected to participate actively in items A) and C),
although not necessarily in both in any one given year. A Member's
responsibilities related to item A) shall consist of those teaching or library
duties which are assigned by the Dean/Director of the Library as per Article
2.10 - Academic Workload. Certain specific duties related to item A) and C)
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 14

may also be assigned by the Dean/Director of the Library on an ad hoc basis
in order to ensure a good and proper functioning of the University. A
Member's responsibilities relating to item D), E) and F) are undertaken
voluntarily by the Member.
In order that they may meet their responsibilities according to this
article, Members shall be provided with reasonable access to facilities and
services per Article 1.23.
Some specific features of academic responsibilities are set out in the
following sections:
PRIORITY I
A. Teaching
1. Members have an obligation to develop and maintain their scholarly
competence and effectiveness as teachers within the area of their expertise.
They shall inform their students regarding their methods of evaluation,
which have been approved by the unit and the Dean, consistent with Senate
policies. They shall also inform their students regarding their instructional
methods and seek approval of the unit and of the Dean for substantial
changes in instructional methods involving significant increases in costs or
alterations in the established policy of the unit, e.g. conversion of a lecture
course to a reading course.
In addition, Members of the alternate stream have an obligation to
continue their professional development to enhance and broaden their
professional and teaching ability.
2. While it is recognised that whenever possible there shall be adequate
consultation with the Member and the unit as to the assignment of teaching
duties, once such teaching duties have been assigned in a fair and equitable
manner by the Dean, it is the responsibility of the Member to teach the
assigned courses to students registered in them at the time and place
designated by the Dean in a manner which reflects the area of the content of
the course approved by the unit consistent with the University calendar.
Assignment of teaching duties shall be consistent with Article 2.10
Academic Workload. Teaching responsibilities include being available for
reasonable consultation with students at their teaching locale subject to
Article 2.10 Academic Workload.
3. Members shall comply with all properly established regulations of the
University, which are not at variance with this Agreement. Members shall
accept responsibility for participation in the effective operation of the
University, including responsibilities for academic counselling, registration,
and the supervision of examinations as appropriately assigned by the unit,
the Dean or the Registrar's office consistent with Senate policy. During
examinations, only the head invigilator shall be a faculty Member. The head
invigilator shall be selected randomly from the LUFA full-time faculty
membership and the names of those who serve shall be removed from the
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 15

pool of potential head invigilators until all remaining Members have served.
The names of those Members not scheduling any of their final examinations
through the Registrar’s Office, will not be included in the pool for the
examination period concerned.
4. It is the responsibility of Members to deal ethically and fairly with
students and their academic colleagues in relation to their own teaching.
Ethical and fair dealing with students and colleagues includes respecting the
Laurentian Policy and Procedures on Personal or Sexual Harassment. It is
also the responsibility of Members to foster a free exchange of ideas
including a discussion of differing views, to avoid discrimination, to respect
the principles of confidentiality in a manner consistent with the performance
of their academic role, and to acknowledge their indebtedness to students
and their academic colleagues in relation to their own teaching.
5. Each Member shall have freedom of discussion. However, in the
exercise of this freedom in the classroom, reasonable restraint shall be used
in introducing matters unrelated to his/her subject or discipline.
6. Members shall be free to organise and to structure classroom and
laboratory activities and to adopt reasonable means to maintain a learning
environment, which is both productive and orderly. They shall have the
right to rule on the use by students of recording devices and calculating
devices in the classroom, laboratory or learning situation.
7. Members shall not alter or cancel scheduled instruction except with
prior permission of the Chairperson/Director in any but exceptional
circumstances. Such permission shall not be unreasonably refused. Both
parties agree that every reasonable effort will be made to notify the students
affected. Timetable changes of a permanent nature require the prior
permission of the Dean. Absences are governed by Article 3.6 - Absence -
General.
A. Professional Librarianship /Archives Management
1. Members have an obligation to develop and to maintain their scholarly
competence and effectiveness as librarians within the area of their expertise.
2. While it is recognised that whenever possible there shall be adequate
consultation between the Member and the Director of the Library as to the
assignment of duties, once such duties have been assigned in a fair and
equitable manner by the Director of the Library, it is the responsibility of the
Members to perform their duties at the time and place designated by the
Director of the Library. Assignment of professional library / archives
management duties shall be consistent with Article 2.10 - Academic
Workload.
3. It is the responsibility of Members to deal ethically and fairly with
those to whom they render professional service. Ethical and fair dealing
with clients and colleagues includes respecting the Laurentian Policy and
Procedures on Personal or Sexual Harassment. It is also the responsibility of
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 16

Members to foster a free exchange of ideas, to avoid discrimination, to
respect the principles of confidentiality in a manner consistent with the
performance of their academic role, and to acknowledge their indebtedness
to their academic colleagues in relation to their own professional activities.
4. Members shall have the right and responsibility to adopt reasonable
means to maintain an orderly and productive learning environment in the
library / archives.
5. Members, if involved in scheduled work-related activities, shall not
alter or cancel such scheduled activities except with prior permission of the
Director of the Library in any but exceptional circumstances. Such
permission shall not be unreasonably refused. Both parties agree that every
reasonable effort will be made to notify the person affected. Absences are
governed by Article 3.6 - Absence - General.
B. Scholarly Activity
1. Members shall have the right and responsibility to devote a reasonable
proportion of their time to scholarly activity.
2. It is understood that for the purposes of this Collective Agreement the
term "scholarly activity" means:
a) Research directed towards a contribution to knowledge, and the
dissemination of its results;
and/or
b) Participation in those academic activities that contribute to the
enhancement, creation and dissemination of knowledge;
and/or
c) Creative and professional activities which contribute to one's
discipline.
3. Scholarly activity may involve, although not necessarily be limited to
the following, but in each case the Member must demonstrate that the
activity is of good quality and is consistent with the contribution to
knowledge described in paragraph 2 above. It is understood that this list
does not imply an order of priority. It is also understood that the following
forms of scholarly activity are not necessarily to be given equal weight and
application for each discipline when a Member is being evaluated for an
annual increment, merit increment, tenure or promotion. In such
evaluations, where the evidence does not rest on externally reviewed
publications, other evidence of scholarly activity must be considered, but the
burden of proof rests upon the candidate.
a) The writing or editing and publication of books, textbooks,
journals and of articles.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 17

b) The obtention of additional appropriate academic and/or
professional qualifications.
c) Research carried out on research contracts.
d) The writing of case studies.
e) The development of teaching/library materials, of an innovative
sort which have a wider application than the Member's own
teaching/library activities.
f) The compilation and publication of scholarly bibliographies, or
literary work.
g) The translation and publication of scholarly or literary work.
h) Literary and artistic works appropriate to one's discipline.
i) Demonstrated leadership in the area of professional education,
including workshops.
j) Creative application of existing knowledge through such activities
as consulting or workshops.
4. The parties agree that scholarly activity does not normally include
research directly related to the immediate and normal preparation for
teaching activity.
5. Where appropriate in their published work, the Members shall indicate
affiliation with the University and acknowledge their indebtedness to
students and their academic colleagues in relation to their own research.
6. The parties encourage all members of the bargaining unit to deposit one
signed copy of their published material in the University Library. The
University agrees to pay for reasonable expenses incurred by a Member in
making such material available to the Library.
7. Members have the right to participate in the activities of professional or
learned societies and the like, providing such activities do not conflict with
the reasonable fulfilment of assigned duties.
PRIORITY II
C. University Governance and Administrative Duties
1. To the extent consistent with their teaching/library and scholarly
responsibilities, Members shall contribute to the governance of the
University through membership on appropriate bodies. It is understood that
for the purposes of this Article, service to colleagues within the University
context will be considered equivalent to service on Unit/Senate Committees.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 18

2. While exercising university governance and administrative
responsibilities, Members shall deal ethically with other university
employees and students so that objectivity, fairness, and absence of
discrimination are maintained in all deliberations including assessment of
performance of any employee or student. Members shall not infringe on the
academic freedom of academic colleagues or students or breach
confidentiality in this regard.
3. In order to ensure equality of opportunity to participate in university
governance, the University agrees to circulate notice of openings on all
university bodies above the Department/School/Library level to eligible
Members at least two weeks prior to the time that the vacancies must be
filled. As a university body, the Association agrees to circulate notice of
vacancies, which allow Members to serve colleagues at least two (2) weeks
prior to the time that these vacancies must be filled.
PRIORITY III
D. Outside Professional Activities
1. The parties encourage Members to participate in outside professional
activities.
2. The scope and nature of any professional activities of a substantial
nature, whether paid or unpaid shall be reported in writing to the
Dean/Director of the Library as part of the annual report of Members.
Notwithstanding the above, contractual activities that would involve
Members spending a total of more than one half day a week on a regular
basis between Monday and Friday during a term in which they teach or
perform professional library duties shall be reported in writing to the
Dean/Director of the Library prior to the signing of the contract or beginning
of the work. The Dean/Director of the Library may require the Members not
to undertake an activity or to moderate such an activity on the grounds that
the time involved would or does interfere with the Member's academic
obligations as defined in this Agreement. A reasonable period of time shall
be allowed for the Members to comply. The appropriateness of the decisions
of the Dean/Director of the Library on these matters is subject to grievance
and arbitration.
3. When undertaking outside professional activities, Members retain the
rights and responsibilities associated with academic freedom.
4. When a Member's outside professional activities involve the use of the
University's facilities, supplies or services, permission for their use shall be
approved in writing or through email by the appropriate University
Administrator. Such permission shall not be unreasonably refused. These
services shall normally be paid for at the prevailing internal University user
rate, unless the University Administrator agrees in writing to waive all or
part of the fee(s).
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 19

E. Service to the Community
1. The parties encourage Members to offer service to the community.
2. The rights and responsibilities of Members who offer service to the
community shall be the same as for those members who participate in
outside professional activities, as modified by 3 below.
3. When a Member's service to the community involves the use of the
University's facilities, supplies or services, permission for their use shall be
approved in writing or through email by the appropriate University
Administrator. Such permission shall not be unreasonably refused. These
services shall normally be paid for at the prevailing external University user
rate, unless the University Administrator agrees in writing to waive all or
part of the fee(s).
PRIORITY IV
F. Other Paid Activity
1. Faculty members have the right to engage in other paid activity.
2. All such activities shall be governed by Section D.2, except the annual
report where such reporting shall be optional to the Member.
ARTICLE 2.01 - ASSESSMENT OF A MEMBER'S
PERFORMANCE
1. When making an assessment, the assessing body shall take into account
all relevant factors including.
a) The nature and scope of past teaching/librarianship activities.
b) The nature and scope of administrative responsibilities of
Members.
c) The unique nature of Laurentian University, that is, small size,
remote location and demands of off-campus teaching.
d) When assessing Librarians, the amount of available time for
scholarly activity shall be taken into account.
2. The assessment of a Member's teaching performance shall be based on:
Senate approved course evaluations
and
The Member's annual teaching dossier.
a) During each term of the academic year, the Board shall administer
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 20

the course evaluations approved by the Laurentian University Senate.
The Vice-President, Academic shall be responsible for the distribution
and collection of the said instruments. It is agreed that Members shall
have access to the results of course evaluations prior to their use by the
University.
b) It is the responsibility of Members to maintain on an annual basis
their teaching dossiers. For each course, the annual dossier must contain
at least the following material:
i) Course syllabus and sufficient material to permit an
evaluation of the contents of the course, the teaching/learning
process, and the means of assessing the performance of the
students.
ii) Sufficient material to permit the evaluation of the Member's
teaching performance as perceived by groups such as graduates,
peers, or students.
iii) The file should also contain any other material that the
Member deems relevant to his/her teaching role.
c) Committees, which may use the results of the course evaluations
and the contents of the teaching dossier in their deliberations, shall
receive suitable guidelines on their use and interpretation from the
Vice-President, Academic.
Should a Member feel that a course should be exempt from the
approved evaluation process, reasons for exemption should be addressed to
the Vice-President, Academic no later than the end of the first week of
classes in that course. The Vice-President will communicate his decision on
the request prior to the planned date of the course evaluation.
3. Notwithstanding the priorities for teaching/librarianship and/or
scholarly activities as noted in the various articles in this Agreement, the
parties recognise that the University benefits greatly from significant
contributions in many areas including academic administration and/or
university governance, continuous involvement in a Member's professional/
learned society or in a community activity directly related to the work of the
University. The parties agree that Members who have made such
contributions shall have these contributions taken into especial account as
compensating for lesser performance in another area.
Notwithstanding the priorities for scholarly activities as noted in the
various articles in this Agreement, the parties recognise that the University
benefits greatly from the contributions of Members who are exceptional
teachers. Members who can make such a contribution shall have this taken
into especial account as compensating for lesser performance in another
area. When considering librarians, professional service and library
management skills shall be substituted for "teaching".
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 21

4. Every assessing body shall put forward its recommendation or decision
in written form setting forth its findings and grounds for recommendation or
decision in order that a member may know which factors were persuasive in
a recommendation or decision.
ARTICLE 2.10 - ACADEMIC WORKLOAD
1. The academic workload shall be assigned in a fair and equitable
manner. To help ensure this goal, each member of a unit shall receive a copy
of the Chair’s recommendations to the Dean/Director of the Library on
workload, including any recommendations for overload payments, as well as
a copy of the Dean’s/Director of the Library’s decision on these
recommendations.
2. The academic workload of a Member in the regular stream includes in
varying proportions teaching/professional librarianship, including the
supervision of graduate students, scholarly activity including commitments
to external granting agencies, administrative duties and other contributions to
the University.
The academic workload of a Member in the alternate teaching stream
may include teaching, clinical supervision, coaching, professional
development, and administrative duties.
3. The assignment of the workload shall be communicated in reasonable
detail, in writing, to the Member by 1 June by the Dean/Director of the
Library. The Dean/Director of the Library shall request the written advice of
the unit concerned at least one month prior to 1 June and the Dean/Director
of the Library shall normally accept the advice of the unit. The time-tabling
of the teaching load/library assignment shall be communicated in writing to
the Member by 1 July by the Dean/Director of the Library after consultation
with the Registrar. For the duration of this agreement the Registrar shall
have final authority in time-tabling all courses.
4. The composition of the workload of particular Members may vary with
their discipline, and will take into account the capabilities of the Members,
the need to maximise their potential and any obligations placed on them
within the University's operations, consistent with the terms of this
Agreement. In the assignment of teaching loads, the Deans, in consultation
with the academic units, shall consider, not only the number of courses
taught by a Member, but the size and type of such courses. It is understood
that there will be no rigid formula for course assignments based solely on the
number of separate courses taught by a Member.
5. The Dean/Director of the Library may include in Members' workloads
any teaching/professional library assignment related to their discipline and
any administrative activity that the Dean/Director of the Library considers
necessary for the effective operation of the Faculty/Library or of the
University program. With regard to the load for teaching/professional
librarianship, generally prevailing past practices shall apply unless these
practices have been the result of Members undertaking voluntarily unpaid
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 22

overloads to maintain the integrity of programmes or service commitments
in units which have suffered complement reductions due to budgetary
pressures or unless specific provisions in this contract state otherwise.
6. The determination of the workload shall be subject to the following
conditions:
a) The Dean/Director of the Library, in accordance with Article 1.21,
Academic Freedom, shall not impose specific scholarly tasks other than
the teaching/professional librarianship duties referred to in 5 above.
Specific tasks related to the internal governance of the Unit shall not be
imposed by the Dean/Director of the Library, except for the
appointment of an Acting Chairperson/Director as in Articles 5.0 and
5.1. The Dean/Director of the Library may assign specific
responsibilities concerning a University-related community activity in
consultation with the Member. The Member shall not unreasonably
refuse.
b) The Dean/Director of the Library shall normally not impose on
any individual a workload in excess of that which in the past has
generally been applicable to members within the Faculty/Library to
which the Member belongs. The Parties agree that excessive overload
teaching/professional library work is undesirable and for that reason
compensation for teaching-related overloads from all sources,
including courses administered through the Centre for Continuing
Education, shall be limited to the maximum payable for 9 credits (as
per Article 4.30 - Overloads) during the Fall/Winter Session
(September to April), and for 6 credits during the Spring Session
(May to August) or its equivalent in the Library. The Parties further
agree that the 9-credit overload allowance during the Fall/Winter
session, and the 6-credit overload allowance during the Spring
Session, shall be limited to three consecutive years.
Where the above limitation on total compensation to a Member
involves a component from the supervision of a distance education
course(s) according to Article 4.31 5, the University shall make
available marking assistance as required and in keeping with the
degree of limitation.
c) From time to time, the Dean/Director of the Library, in
consultation with the unit may request a Member to undertake
additional duties over and above the normal workload. In such
instances, an overload payment may be made, as in Article 4.30
Overload. The Member shall not unreasonably refuse such
assignments. Members who believe they are entitled to overload
payments shall apply through the Dean/Director of the Library to the
Vice-President, Academic within 10 working days after the assignment
of the workload. This official shall provide an answer, in writing, to the
Member within 10 working days of his application. If negative, the
decision shall be accompanied with reasons.
d) In the event that a workload assignment, with regard to the courses
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 23

taught or professional librarian duties, is not acceptable to the Member
or the Unit, after discussion with the Dean/Director of the Library, the
Member or the Unit may appeal to the Vice-President, Academic by 1
July. The decision of the VP shall be final and shall be communicated
in writing to the Member/unit before 1 August.
7. Once assigned, workloads shall not be altered except in cases of
emergency. If a proposed workload must be altered, such alteration will be
taken into consideration in the annual performance evaluation.
If the Dean, for non-emergency reasons, deems it necessary to alter the
workload of a Member once it has been assigned, the Dean must obtain the
agreement of the Member.
Any alteration to a Member’s workload, including any associated
overload payments shall be communicated to each Member of the unit
within five working days after the Member has been formally notified of the
change.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this Article, when an assigned
course(s) is cancelled because of zero registration in the course(s) there
arises an obligation on the part of the Member to undertake additional work
in order to maintain fairness and equity within the Academic Unit. The
nature and extent of such work shall be determined in discussions between
the Member, the Chair of the Academic Unit and the Dean. In the event that
the Member was scheduled to receive an overload stipend such a stipend
should be reduced appropriately. In the case where additional work assigned
is in the form of a course, such course shall be one the Member has taught in
the last two years, unless otherwise agreed to by the Member.
8. The determination of the workload for Members of the teaching faculty
shall also be subject to the following conditions:
a) Members may be requested to teach any of the three sessions on
and off campus and if requested, they shall not unreasonably refuse,
provided that the requests are made on a fair and equitable basis within
the unit.
b) Such teaching service outside the Sudbury Winter-session shall be
assigned on a rotational basis and normally not more than once every
three years.
c) In the case of correspondence or off-campus courses, consultation
times shall be arranged for the teaching locale in accordance with the
requirements of the subject matter. The unit Chairperson/Director shall
outline the norms in consultation with the unit.
d) In the case of evening courses, the Dean shall not assign another
course scheduled to begin within twelve (12) hours of the scheduled
end of the evening course unless the Member agrees to this in writing.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 24

e) With the exception of Members who are teaching at this university
for the first time or teaching in a new programme, no Member shall be
required in an academic year to prepare for more than one full course or
two half-courses (or equivalent) which he has not taught at least once
during the previous four years. Normally, no Member shall be required
to undertake such course preparation more than once every two years,
nor shall any Member be required to undertake new course preparation
unless requested to do so by 1 June.
f) Members may be required to supervise or develop distance
education courses as part of their normal workload subject to provisions
of Article 4.31. Members whose appointments specifically included the
development of distance education courses as part of their normal
workload may be assigned such duties for the duration of their
contract(s).
g) In order to enhance the ability of Members to undertake
scholarly activity, it is desirable to schedule the teaching activities in
such a way as to create blocks of time free of scheduled teaching
activities. Members wishing to create such teaching-free blocks shall
approach the Chair of the academic unit(s) and the Dean with an
appropriate request. These officials shall make reasonable efforts to
accommodate such requests within the constraints imposed by
requirements of offering programs and courses to students. When
competing requests for teaching-free time blocks cannot be met for
all applicants, priority shall be given to those individuals who earlier
have been unsuccessful in making such a request, provided that these
were based on bona fide requirements to enhance scholarly activity.
h) Full-time Members teaching in programs where the preparation
of a thesis is mandatory for students have an obligation to participate
in the thesis supervision provided that they are qualified to do so.
However, the Parties agree that the close working relationship
desirable for the successful preparation of a thesis is best achieved
under conditions that allow for mutual choice on the part of the
Member and the student before entering the supervisor/student
relationship.
i) The supervision of a research master’s or Ph.D. thesis in a
programme offered by Laurentian, where such supervision is over
and above normal workload, shall be recognised upon its successful
defence as equivalent to one credit as a teaching load reduction for
the supervisor of the thesis. This credit may be shared by agreement
between two or more Members who have contributed to the thesis
supervision. In cases of disagreement the Dean shall arbitrate the
proportions. If circumstances within the academic unit make the
teaching load reduction undesirable, an amount of $1,000 per credit
shall be added to the amount a Member may spend for professional
expenditures upon consultation with the Chair of the Unit and the
Dean. This provision will be effective for advanced practicum in
Social Work (12 credits or more) completed after the ratification of
the Collective Agreement.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 25

In master's or Ph.D. programmes offered by Laurentian where
students have the option of writing a research essay or carrying out a
research project (valued at least as six (6) credits) in lieu of a full
research thesis where such supervision is over and above normal
workload and where such work is reviewed by a formal committee
process, the supervision of such work will be recognised at the value
of one half credit as teaching load reduction for the supervisor of the
thesis. This half-credit may be shared by agreement among two or
more Members who have contributed to the thesis supervision. In
cases of disagreement the Dean shall arbitrate the proportions. If
circumstances within the academic unit make the teaching load
reduction undesirable, an amount of $500 per half-credit shall be
added to the amount a Member may spend for professional
expenditures. This provision will be effective for essays or projects
completed after the ratification of the Collective Agreement.
9. The determination of the workload for professional librarians shall also
be subject to the following conditions:
a) Members may be requested to offer service during one evening
per week and if requested, they shall not unreasonably refuse, provided
that such requests are made on a fair and equitable basis.
b) Professional librarians may be expected to carry library
supervisory duties.
10. In order to promote research within the University, a Member may have
his teaching/library service workload altered.
a) Without compensation to the University.
For such an assignment to become operative, it shall require the
recommendation of the unit, of the Dean/Director of the Library, and
approval of the Vice-President, Academic. Faculty Members who
receive one or more course reductions for purposes of enhancing
scholarly activity, including the preparation of teaching materials for
the Centre for Continuing Education, shall not be entitled to
overloads as per Article 6.b) above. This restriction shall also apply
to Librarians whose workload is also reduced for scholarly purposes.
b) With compensation to the University.
A Member with a regular teaching load may request a buy-out of up
to 6 credits of teaching load per year or the equivalent of professional
library service in order to concentrate on research activities. The buy-
out must be applied for no later than May 1 of the year proceeding
the academic year for which it is requested and must be approved by
the Dean/Director of the Library in consultation with the Academic
Unit by June 1. The buy-out shall cover the actual cost (including
benefits) to replace the teaching/professional library work but shall
not exceed the overload or sessional rate of pay as appropriate. A
buyout will not be granted if an appropriate replacement for the
teaching/professional library work cannot be secured; otherwise
permission shall not be unreasonably withheld.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 26

11. The workload of any or all Members shall be made known to the
Association on request.
12. It is acknowledged that the provision of teaching assistants is a factor to
be considered in the assignment of workloads. As such the Vice-President,
Academic will ensure to the greatest degree possible the equitable
distribution amongst the Faculties of such assistance, consistent with the
policies of Academic Councils.
ARTICLE 2.11 - ANNUAL REPORT FOR MEMBERS
1. All Members of the Bargaining Unit except those Members on
sabbatical or other leaves who have given prior notice to their Dean/Director
of the Library of their intent to postpone submission until their return shall
submit a report in writing on their activities for the preceding twelve (12)
months to the Dean/Director of the Library, through the Chairperson, by
May 15th. The report will cover all components of his/her responsibilities as
listed under Article 2.00 - Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of Academics.
2. In preparing their reports, Members shall use the appropriate
standardised form developed for each Faculty and the Library.
3. It is also the responsibility of the Members to provide annually an
up-to-date and corrected C.V. for their personnel file.
ARTICLE 2.20 - ACADEMIC QUALIFICATIONS GUIDELINES
For the purpose of this Agreement the following definitions shall apply:
a) "Doctoral degree" shall mean an earned Ph.D. or other degree
formally recognised as equivalent to an earned Ph.D.
b) "Relevant experience" shall mean any combination of teaching
and scholarly activity as defined in Article 2.00 - Rights
Responsibilities and Duties of Academics and/or equivalent
professional experience.
c) "Professional designation" shall mean a diploma earned as a result
of additional experience/training and qualifying examinations such as,
but not limited to C.A., R.I.A., C.G.A., and C.R.E.D.I.F., or others
agreed to by the parties.
d) When considering librarians, professional service or, where
appropriate, library supervision shall be substituted for "teaching".
In interpreting these guidelines, the following shall apply:
a) Article 2.00 - Rights, Responsibilities and Duties
b) Article 2.01 - Assessment of a Member's Performance
c) Article 2.20 - Academic Qualifications Guidelines
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 27

d) For those persons appointed prior to 1 July 2002, Article 2.20,
of the 1999-2002 agreement shall apply.
1. Academic Qualifications Guidelines for Appointment or Promotion of
Members of the Regular Stream Teaching Faculty.
a) For the rank of Instructor
(i) A Baccalaureate degree;
or
(ii) Professional or semi-professional qualifications plus relevant
professional experience which allows the individual to make a
contribution to a program.
b) For the rank of Lecturer
(i) A Master's degree or equivalent degree;
or
(ii) A Baccalaureate degree and an appropriate professional
designation.
c) For the rank of Assistant Professor
(i) A Doctoral degree;
or
(ii) A Master's degree or equivalent and satisfactory performance
of the Member's responsibilities and duties over a five-year period
as per Article 4.11 and demonstrated evidence of scholarly activity
as per Article 2.00;
or
iii) In the Department of Law and Justice, eight years of full-
time university education (or the equivalent) during which time
the Member must have obtained a LL.B. and an appropriate
Master’s degree.
d) For the rank of Associate Professor
(i) A Doctoral degree;
and
(ii) Teaching, the quality of which is satisfactory as determined
solely by the method of teaching evaluation mandated by the
Collective Agreement;
and
(iii) Evidence of scholarly activity (as per Article 2.00 Rights and
Responsibilities) that is of good quality;
and
(iv) At the time the promotion to Associate becomes effective, at
least five (5) years of full-time teaching and/or research in a
university or an institution of equivalent level or at least five (5)
years of professional experience judged to be relevant for teaching
at the university level.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 28

(v) The requirement for scholarly activity as stipulated under (iii)
may be replaced in exceptional cases by a consistently
demonstrated quality of teaching and tutorial activity that clearly
indicates outstanding qualities as a teacher as established by
whatever is the generally accepted method of evaluation.
e) For the rank of Full Professor
A Member shall have:
(i) A Doctoral degree;
and
(ii) Teaching, the quality of which is satisfactory as determined
solely by the method of teaching evaluation mandated by the
Collective Agreement;
and
(iii) Shown evidence of scholarly activity (per Article 2.00 Rights
and Responsibilities) throughout the Member’s career and after
his/her promotion to Associate Professor that ranks as a recognised
contribution to the scholarly field or professional activity
concerned. This work must be judged by four (4) external
referees, who shall normally be full professors in an academic
institution, and at least two (2) of these referees may be nominated
by the candidate;
and
(iv) Normally, at the time that the promotion to Full Professor
becomes effective, at least ten (10) years of full-time teaching
and/or research in a university or in an institution of equivalent
level, or has accumulated at least ten (10 years of professional
experience judged to be relevant for teaching at the University
level;
Alternative to the requirements for promotion to Full Professor:
The requirement for scholarly activity stipulated under (ii) may be
replaced in extraordinary circumstances by a requirement that the
Member has consistently shown clearly outstanding qualities as a
teacher and has scholarly activity of good quality.
2. Academic Qualifications Guidelines for Appointment or Promotion of
Members of the Alternate Stream Teaching Faculty.
a) For the rank of Instructor
(i) A Baccalaureate degree;
or
(ii) Professional or semi-professional qualifications plus relevant
professional experience which allows the individual to make a
contribution to a program.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 29

b) For the rank of Lecturer
(i) A Master's degree or equivalent degree;
or
(ii) A Baccalaureate degree and an appropriate professional
qualification;
and
Proficiency in one of the areas of professional specialisation of the
unit to which the candidate is appointed and proficiency in
imparting that specialised knowledge and current professional
expertise to students.
c) For the rank of Assistant Professor
(i) A Doctoral degree;
or
(ii) A Master's degree and appropriate professional
qualifications;
and
(iii) Demonstrated, over five (5) years, effectiveness in teaching
based in part on mastery of the subject area and the ability to
stimulate and challenge students;
and
(iv) Evidence of current professional development that continues
to enhance and broaden the candidate’s capacities as a professional
and teacher;
and
(v) Evidence of current professional involvement in the
community through practice, consultation, activities in
professional organisations, and public education and service.
d) For the rank of Associate Professor
(i) A Doctoral degree;
or
A Master's degree and appropriate professional qualifications;
and
(ii) Demonstrated over five (5) years at the rank of Assistant
consistently high quality of teaching that clearly indicates
exceptional qualities as a teacher, and teaching performance above
the normal expectations of an alternate teaching stream member as
evaluated by peer review and recognition as a teaching expert;
and
(iii) Achievement of clinical or professional expertise that is
highly regarded and recognised by the professional peers as
making significant contributions to the advancement of the
profession. Demonstrate increased depth in defined areas of
practice and teaching as evidenced by the development, utilisation,
and dissemination of innovative teaching techniques;
and
(iv) Continuous enhancement and broadening of capacities
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 30

through professional development since previous promotion;
and
(v) Evidence of current professional involvement in the
community through practice, consultation, activities in
professional organisations, and public education and service since
previous promotion.
e) For the rank of Full Professor
(i) A doctoral degree;
and
(ii) Demonstrated over at least ten (10) years of full-time
teaching in a university, or in an institution of equivalent level, a
consistently high quality of teaching that clearly indicates
exceptional qualities as a teacher, and teaching performance above
the normal expectations of an alternate teaching stream member as
evaluated by peer review and recognition as a teaching expert;
and
(iii) Demonstrated (including publication) originality and
creativity in the advancement of the profession through teaching
innovations and contributions to the profession;
and
(iv) Has achieved a reputation among professional peers as an
expert in a specialised area on a provincial and/or national level.
3. Academic Qualifications Guidelines for Appointment or Promotion of
Professional Librarians and Archivists.
a) For the rank of General Librarian or General Archivist
A Master's degree, in Library or Archival Studies.
b) For the rank of Assistant Librarian or Assistant Archivist
(i) A doctoral degree, it being understood that unless this
doctoral degree is in the field of Library Science or Archival
Studies, it shall be accompanied by a Master's degree or
equivalent qualifications in Library Science or Archival Studies;
or
(ii) A Master's degree in Library Science or Archival Studies and
professional service and library or archival supervisory skills
relevant to academic librarianship or archival management, the
quality of which is established as clearly satisfactory by whatever
is the generally accepted method of evaluation over a period of
four years; and demonstrated evidence of scholarly activity as per
Article 2:00.
c) For the rank of Associate Librarian or Associate Archivist
(i) An appropriate doctoral degree, it being understood that
unless this doctoral degree is in the field of Library Science or
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 31

Archival Studies, it shall be accompanied by a Master's degree or
equivalent qualifications in Library Science or Archival Studies;
or
In exceptional cases, a Master's degree in Library Science or
Archival Studies and professional service and library or archival
supervisory skills relevant to academic librarianship or archival
management, the quality of which is established as clearly
satisfactory by whatever is the generally accepted method of
evaluation over a period of four years; and demonstrated evidence
of scholarly activity as per Article 2:00 since last promotion;
and
(ii) At the time the promotion to Associate becomes effective, at
least five (5) years of full-time professional service relevant to
academic librarianship or archival management.
d) For the rank of Full Librarian or Full Archivist
(i) An appropriate doctoral degree, it being understood that
unless this doctoral degree is in the field of Library Science or
Archival Studies, it shall be accompanied by a Master's degree or
equivalent qualifications in Library Science or Archival Studies;
or
In exceptional cases, a Master's degree in Library Science or
Archival Studies and professional service and library or archival
supervisory skills relevant to academic librarianship or archival
management, the quality of which is established as clearly
satisfactory by whatever is the generally accepted method of
evaluation over a period of four years; and demonstrated evidence
of scholarly activity as per Article 2:00 since last promotion;
and
(ii) Have demonstrated outstanding professional performance
and, in addition, have shown evidence of on-going scholarly
activity of good quality (as per Article 2.00) throughout the
Member’s career and after his/her promotion to Associate
Librarian or Associate Archivist. This work must be judged by
four (4) external referees, two of whom may be nominated by the
candidate;
and
(iii) Have normally accumulated, at the time the promotion to
Full Librarian or Full Archivist becomes effective, at least ten (10)
years of full-time professional service relevant to academic
librarianship or archival management.
4. Bilingualism.
a) The Board may, in consultation with the Units:
(i) Stipulate in advertising for and in appointing Members, that a
bilingual candidate is preferred or required;
(ii) Require the appointment of candidates capable of working in
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 32

either or both of the official languages in order to improve the
balance between courses offered in English and courses offered in
French within any Academic Unit, School or Faculty;
(iii) Require the appointment of candidates capable of working in
either or both of the official languages in the Library;
(iv) Consider bilingualism as a desired qualification for those
Members who are selected to take on specific responsibilities.
b) Letters of appointment shall clearly indicate any bilingual
requirements which are to be a condition of being granted tenure and
any assistance that the Board might agree to provide to the Members
for them to meet these requirements.
c) A Member's performance in both French and English will be taken
into consideration in such matters as promotion and tenure.
5. A Member who has consistently demonstrated clearly outstanding
performance in the areas of teaching/professional librarianship, research,
and/or administration may, in extraordinary circumstances, be promoted to
the next rank without fulfilling the years of experience criterion as stipulated
in Sections 1c, 1d, 1e, or 2b, 2c, 2d of this Article. The burden of proof of
outstanding performance rests with the applicant.
ARTICLE 2.21 - APPOINTMENT AND RENEWAL
Appointment of Members of the Bargaining Unit
1. New appointments that fall within the Bargaining Unit shall normally
be advertised:
a) Within the University and
b) Outside the University
In suitable national and discipline publications such as University
Affairs, CAUT Bulletin and other publications that may be especially
directed to professionals who belong to any of the four designated
employment equity groups. Advertisements shall contain a clause stating
that Laurentian University is committed to employment equity.
2. a) Appointments shall be made by the Vice-President, Academic on
behalf of the Board and on the recommendation of the Dean/Director of
the Library and the Department/School concerned.
b) The letter of appointment shall indicate the unit to which the
Member will be assigned and shall also indicate whether the
appointment is to the regular stream or the alternate teaching stream.
c) In the event that an appointee will have duties and responsibilities
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 33

in more than one unit or program then one unit shall be declared to be
the Member's unit. Wherever in this Agreement recommendations or
evaluations of a Member's performance are required from a unit, in
addition to the recommendation or evaluation from the assigned unit,
the other unit(s) or program(s) shall also submit their recommendation
or evaluation; these recommendations shall carry a weight
approximately proportional to the duties and responsibilities of the
Member in each program/unit.
3. If a number of candidates have been judged to be substantially equal in
qualifications and appropriateness of academic specialisation, priority shall
be given to Canadian citizens, permanent residents, and persons on minister's
permits.
4. a) Where selection has to take place among equally qualified
candidates, relevant criteria for appointment shall include
teaching/professional, scholarly potential and employment equity goals.
b) In disciplines where it is difficult to attract qualified faculty, and/or
in order to achieve employment equity goals, the University and LUFA
will work together to devise and implement innovative appointment
arrangements in order to combine appointments with the opportunity to
complete doctoral degrees.
c) All unit search committees for new faculty appointments shall
include at least one woman. Where the unit has no women members,
the Dean/Director of the Library, in consultation with the unit, shall
appoint a woman Member from another unit to the search committee.
d) The search committees shall be proactive in the recruitment of
female candidates. If it is not possible to find a suitable female
candidate for the short list, then the search committee will provide the
Vice-President Academic with a detailed summary of the special
measures that were undertaken to satisfy this requirement.
5. Appointments shall be made only to the ranks referred to in this
agreement, viz, instructor, lecturer, assistant professor, associate professor,
full professor, and the corresponding library ranks (general librarian,
assistant librarian, associate librarian, full librarian).
6. a) Appointments shall be made to either the regular stream or the
alternate teaching stream, only in the status categories referred to in this
agreement, viz, limited term, probationary and tenured. From time to
time the parties may agree to other categories. Appointments to the
alternate stream may be made in the School of Human Movement for
Members whose primary responsibility is the teaching of applied
courses and activities, the School of Nursing for members whose
primary responsibility is clinical education; the School of Social Work
for Members whose primary responsibility is the coordination and
supervision of field placements, admissions and the teaching of
practical courses; and the Department of Français for Members whose
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 34

primary responsibility is language instruction. Such appointments may
not be made in any other unit. Furthermore, such appointments cannot
be made where the number of alternate stream members would exceed
25% of the full-time faculty of the unit.
b) Any Member may apply for an opening in the other stream.
Should members of one stream receive appointments in the other
stream they shall transfer with their rank, salary, and type of
appointment provided the rank and type of appointment in the new
position have been authorised by the Vice-President Academic.
7. Appointments shall be made only to the status categories referred to in
this agreement, viz, limited term, probationary and tenured. From time to
time the parties may agree to other categories.
8. Candidates from within the bargaining unit shall be entitled to
consideration for all advertised posts.
9. Letters of appointment shall specify all terms and conditions of
appointments, including rank, status, and salary, and any special conditions
such as bilingual requirements per Articles 1.25 and formal educational
requirements (Article 2.20), special sabbatical credit per Article 3.21 and
extra moving expenses per Article 4.55. No letter of appointment shall
contain any conditions not consistent with this Agreement. A copy of the
letter of appointment, or revisions thereof, shall be forwarded to LUFA at the
same time as the original is sent to the candidate. The candidate’s
telephone/fax numbers and email address, as well as any other means of
contacting the candidate will be included if the candidate has provided them.
10. Upon appointment the new Members shall provide copies of their birth
certificate, or equivalent document, and upon request certified copies of
academic professional qualifications obtained by the Members.
LIMITED TERM APPOINTMENTS
11. Limited Term appointments are appointments that carry no implication
of renewal or continuation beyond the stated term and no implication that the
appointee shall be considered for tenure. Limited term appointees must be
assigned to an academic unit and shall be considered Members unless
excluded by Article 1.30 - Recognition of the Bargaining Unit. Limited term
appointments are utilised:
a) To bring distinguished visitors to the University.
b) For exchange appointments.
c) To provide replacements for Members on leave.
d) To respond to specific academic needs which the Board, for
academic and/or budgetary reasons, does not wish to result in an
appointment in the probationary stream. This shall be done in
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 35

consultation with the Association who shall not unreasonably withhold
its agreement.
e) For appointments to programs with provisional funding or of a
trial nature.
12. Where appointments must be made urgently, the Vice-President,
Academic may, with the agreement of the parties, authorise exceptions to the
procedures in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article. Such agreement shall not
be unreasonably withheld.
13. The Vice-President, Academic has the discretion, after consultation
with the Unit and the Dean/Director of the Library, to re-appoint the holder
of a term appointment without further advertisement. Should the Board
choose to re-advertise the post, the incumbent may apply, but retains no right
of preference over other acceptable candidates. The normal procedures for
appointment will apply.
14. Term appointees may not apply for promotion in the final year of their
term appointment. A term appointee reappointed to a further term
appointment or a term appointee reappointed to a probationary position shall
be reappointed to the same rank that he/she held in the previous
appointment. A Member so reappointed may, subsequent to reappointment,
also apply for a promotion as per Article 2.23. If the Member is granted a
promotion, the said promotion shall be retroactive to the date of the
Member's reappointment.
15. Term appointments shall be limited to a total of three (3) years, except
by agreement of the parties. In cases where the limited term appointment is
a replacement for an academic administrator, the appointment may be for a
term up to five (5) years. The initial term may be for less than a full
academic year, but reappointment shall normally be for a full twelve- (12)
month period. The term limits (three or five) shall apply whether or not the
term appointments are consecutive or intermittent.
16. Non-renewal of term appointments shall not be subject to grievance.
17. For the duration of this Agreement, the Board agrees that the total
number of limited term appointments will not exceed fifteen (15) percent of
the total number of faculty members except with the agreement of the
parties.
PROBATIONARY APPOINTMENTS/TENURE APPOINTMENTS
18. Probationary appointments are defined as appointments lasting up to a
maximum of five (5) years, during which time the employer and the
employee are afforded an opportunity for mutual appraisal.
19. Probation does not imply that the Board will grant tenure at the end of
the probationary period; it does imply that the Board will give serious
consideration to awarding tenure.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 36

20. Should a Member holding a term appointment wish to apply for a
probationary appointment, the Member's application shall be considered in
the normal way along with all other applications for the position. Should
such a Member be appointed to the probationary position, consideration for
tenure shall be awarded on a year-for-year basis, to a maximum of three (3)
years.
21. Faculty appointed on probation will serve a maximum probationary
period based on the academic rank at which the appointment is made.
Faculty appointed at the rank of Lecturer/General Librarian or Assistant
Professor/Assistant Librarian will serve a five- (5) year probationary period.
Faculty appointed at the rank of Associate Professor/ Associate Librarian and
Full Professor/Librarian will serve a three- (3) year probationary period.
Where a Member is appointed at the rank of Full Professor/Librarian the
University may grant tenure on appointment. Under exceptional
circumstances and upon recommendation of both the unit and the Vice-
President, Academic, where a Member is appointed at the rank of Associate
Professor/Librarian the University may grant tenure on appointment,
provided that the new Member is tenured at another recognised university.
22. An Associate Professor/Associate Librarian or Full Professor/ Full
Librarian who has at least three (3) years service to the University, who has
applied for a probationary position, shall be considered for such a position
on the basis of the criteria listed in Article 2.22 - Tenure Evaluation. Should
such a Member be appointed to the position, it shall be a final probationary
appointment of one year with tenure evaluation to begin by 30 September of
that year.
23. In the case of persons appointed at the rank of Lecturer/ General
Librarian and Assistant Professor/Assistant Librarian, the initial probationary
appointment shall be for a period of three (3) years.
a) In their initial letter of appointment by the Vice-President, Academic
and in their annual evaluation letters by the Deans/Director of the Library, all
Members on initial probationary contract shall be notified that they shall
begin to undergo a renewal evaluation by the FPC/FFPC/LPC no later than
September 30 of the final year in their initial probationary contract.
b) Subject to satisfactory performance as outlined in c) below, the initial
probationary contract will be followed by a further two year probationary
appointment with a tenure evaluation to take place in the final year of that
second appointment or as per Article 2.22.
c) The decision whether or not to offer a second two (2) year probationary
appointment shall be reached on the basis of:
(i) judgement of satisfactory performance under procedures set out
under Article 2.11-Annual Report for Members, Article 2.22-Tenure
Evaluation Procedures and Article 4.11-Procedures for the
Award/Denial for a Progress-Through-the-Rank Increment;
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 37

(ii) and, for alternate teaching stream faculty, satisfactory evaluations
of teaching, professional expertise, and development; assessments shall
include decanal and peer assessments of teaching based in part on class
visits.
d) In assessing the Member’s progress toward meeting the requirements
for tenure outlined in Article 2.22 paragraphs 2. c, d or e, the
FPC/FFPC/LPC shall comment on each aspect of these criteria. The
FPC/FFPC/LPC should also comment whether the rate of progress shown
during the initial probationary period, if continued, would likely lead to
the award of tenure at the end of the final probationary period. If the
performance is found unsatisfactory the FPC/FFPC/LPC may recommend
that the Member not be offered a final probationary appointment.
24. In the case of persons appointed at the rank of Associate
Professor/Associate Librarian and Full Professor/Librarian, the initial
appointment shall be a three (3) year probationary appointment with a tenure
evaluation to take place in the final year of the appointment, except as
modified in paragraph 20 above.
25. The tenure evaluation is to be conducted in accordance with the
procedures set out in Article 2.22 - Tenure, and will result in a decision either
to award tenure or to allow the appointment to lapse.
ARTICLE 2.22 - TENURE EVALUATION PROCEDURES
1. a) In the interest of the University community and of society at large
tenure protects free criticism and independent judgement and hence
forms an integral part of Academic Freedom per Article 1.21.
b) Tenure means permanency of appointment. Such an appointment
may be terminated through resignation, retirement, dismissal for cause
as established by a proper hearing, redundancy or financial exigency
consistent with the terms of this Agreement, or as otherwise stated in
this Agreement. Tenure includes the right during appointment to
academic freedom and to fair consideration for increases in
responsibility and salary, and promotions in rank.
2. Tenure Evaluation
a) Members on probationary appointments shall normally begin to
undergo a formal tenure evaluation by the FPC/FFPC/LPC no later than
30 September of the final year of their probationary status. However,
Members may apply for tenure one year prior to the final year of their
probationary status. An early application for tenure may not result in a
termination of appointment. Members considered for tenure at the end
of the normal probationary period may be awarded tenure, denied
tenure, or if the Member has not made an early application for tenure,
may have his/her probationary period extended by one additional year,
during which she/he shall be evaluated for tenure for a final time. A
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 38

Member may not be considered for tenure more than twice.
b) All Members on probationary appointments shall begin to undergo
a formal tenure evaluation by the FPC/FFPC/LPC no later than 30
September of the final year of their probationary status.
(i) However, in recognition of the fact that Members may
have to deal with heavier than normal personal responsibilities
or extraordinary circumstances, not faced by the majority of
other Members, the opportunity is provided for a Member to
request a delay of up to two years in the tenure review process.
Members wishing to delay their final tenure evaluation must
apply in writing to the appropriate Dean/Director of the Library
no later than August 1 of the final year of their probationary
appointment describing the special circumstances why a delay
in tenure review is requested, identifying the particular area in
the performance of the Member that would be strengthened by
the delay and what steps the Member will take to meet the
requirements for tenure during the period of the delay. The
Dean/Director of the Library, after discussion with the
appropriate academic unit(s) will forward a recommendation to
the Vice-President, Academic who will render a decision by
September 1. The Vice-President, Academic may authorise a
delay in tenure evaluation for up to two years. If the Vice-
President, Academic does not authorise a delay in tenure
evaluation, the evaluation will proceed. Failure by the Vice-
President, Academic to authorise a delay in tenure evaluation
shall not be subject to grievance and arbitration.
(ii) Members who have taken maternity leave of seventeen (17)
weeks or adoption leave of eight (8) weeks as provided under
Article 3.51 – Family Responsibility during their probationary
period may elect to postpone the mandated evaluations leading to
tenure (both the evaluation for renewal of the probationary
appointment and the final tenure evaluation) by one year for each
incident of leave period.
c) In the case of regular stream teaching faculty, this evaluation shall
be based exclusively on an assessment of:
(i) The probationer's performance, as exemplified in teaching
and scholarly activity. In no instance will tenure be awarded if
teaching performance is judged unsatisfactory as determined
solely by the methods of teaching evaluation mandated by the
Collective Agreement. However, the nature and scope of past
teaching activities shall be taken into account in assessing a
Member;
(ii) The probationer's contribution to the Department or School,
to the University, and as appropriate to the wider community; and
(iii) Whether the probationer has met the formal educational
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 39

and/or professional and/or linguistic qualifications specified in the
original letter of appointment.
d) In the case of alternate stream faculty this evaluation shall be
based on an assessment of:
(i) Probationers’ performance, as exemplified in teaching, the
execution of their assigned workload, and professional
development. Assessments shall be based in part on class visits by
the Dean and the probationers' peers. In no instance will tenure be
awarded if teaching performance is judged unsatisfactory. A
negative decision can be based only on the methods of teaching
evaluation mandated by the Collective Agreement;
(ii) The probationer's contribution to the Department or School,
to the University, and as appropriate to the wider community; and
(iii) Whether the probationer has met the formal educational
and/or professional and/or linguistic qualifications specified in the
original letter of appointment.
e) In the case of librarians, this evaluation shall be based exclusively
on an assessment of:
(i) The probationer's performance, as exemplified in
professional and scholarly activity. In no instance will tenure be
awarded if overall professional performance is unsatisfactory. The
amount and duration of release time allowed librarians for
scholarly output shall be taken into account in assessing a
Member;
(ii) The probationer's contribution to the Library, to the
University and as appropriate to the wider community; and
(iii) Whether the probationer has met the formal educational
and/or professional and/or linguistic qualifications specified in the
original letter of appointment.
f) In the conduct of its tenure evaluation, the FPC/FFPC/LPC shall:
(i) Ask each tenured Member of the unit concerned for a written
assessment of the candidate, plus recommendation in terms of the
criteria stated in 2 c) d) or e) above. Each Member has a
responsibility to submit such an assessment. The Members'
reports shall be forwarded to the Faculty/Library Personnel
Committee not later than 15 October, and summaries shall be
made available to the candidate by the Chairperson of the
FPC/FFPC/LPC, without attribution of assessors.
(ii) Receive a written assessment/recommendation from the
Dean/Director of the Library not later than October 15 and
forward a copy to the Member.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 40

The Parties agree that, where Members are appointed to more
than one unit, assessments shall be sought from all members of
each unit. The assessments shall be weighted in the process to
reflect proportionately the extent of the Member’s teaching
assignments in each of the units.
In units with fewer than six members and in cases where fewer
than four colleagues are required (by reason of tenure
qualifications, etc.) to provide assessments, a Memorandum of
Agreement shall be entered into with LUFA and in consultation
with the Member and with other members of the unit to provide
an appropriately-sized and appropriately-qualified panel of
assessors.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any member being assessed may
request that assessments from additional colleagues with
relevant qualifications and experience should be introduced.
The Member shall so inform the Dean/Director of the Library in
applying for tenure or promotion, and the Dean/Director of the
Library shall officially request assessments from the nominated
assessors. The FPC/FFPC/LPC will be responsible for deciding
what weight to give such assessments.
(iii) Assess the probationer's teaching/professional activities by
means of evaluations that follow Senate sanctioned procedures
and criteria, including student evaluations.
(iv) Interview the probationer.
(v) Forward a written assessment of the candidate including the
assessment/recommendation of the Dean/Director of the Library,
and their decision, in terms of the criteria stated in 2 c) d) or e)
above, consistent with Article 2.00, to the Vice-President,
Academic, with a copy to the probationer, no later than
15 November of the academic year in which the evaluation takes
place.
3. Within 30 days of the FPC/FFPC/LPC decision the Vice-President,
Academic shall confirm or refer back, the decision. In the event that the
Vice-President, Academic refers back the decision, the Vice-President,
Academic shall state to the candidate and the FPC/FFPC/LPC, in writing,
the reasons for the action. The Committee must re-examine and address the
Vice-President’s concerns within 21 days. In making a final decision
whether to offer tenure the Vice-President, Academic shall also take into
consideration any representations made by the Member as well as the
response of the FPC/FFPC/LPC to the specific concerns expressed. The
decision of the Vice-President, Academic whether or not to offer tenure shall
be communicated in writing by the Vice-President, Academic to the Member
with a copy to the FPC/FFPC/LPC and to the Association by January 15 of
the academic year in which the Member is considered for tenure.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 41

4. All Members of the bargaining unit with tenure on 1 July 1980 shall
continue to have tenure.
5. All full-time professional librarians of the bargaining unit having
previously been evaluated for a permanent position at the University shall be
deemed to have tenure effective 1 July 1980.
ARTICLE 2.23 - PROMOTION PROCEDURES
1. The term "promotion" applies to advancement from the rank of
Instructor to Lecturer, Lecturer to Assistant Professor, Assistant Professor to
Associate Professor and Associate Professor to Full Professor, or to
corresponding advancement for the Librarians from the rank of General
Librarian to Assistant Librarian, Assistant Librarian to Associate Librarian
and Associate Librarian to Full Librarian.
2. A Member is eligible to apply for promotion while on leave, but the
Member is responsible for maintaining contact with the University and for
all expenses incurred in making appearances when requested.
3. Members shall normally apply for their own promotion. Applications
may also be submitted by Chairpersons/Directors, or a Dean/Director of the
Library on behalf of Members who have not themselves applied where the
Members have declared their willingness to be considered.
4. Applications shall be made on the prescribed application form and
forwarded in triplicate to the office of the applicant's Dean/Director of the
Library, together with three copies of all necessary and relevant
documentation.
5. The application for promotion shall reach the Dean/Director of the
Library not later than September 30th, for decision in that Academic Year.
Members are urged to consult with the Dean/Director of the Library well in
advance of the application deadline. If the Member so requests by
15 September, the Dean/Director of the Library will prepare a preliminary
written assessment based on the requirements set out in the appropriate
paragraphs of Article 2.20 within one week of receiving the Member’s
application. A copy of this assessment will immediately be forwarded to the
Member who will then have one week to decide whether or not to proceed
with the application.
6. The following documents must be attached to the application for
promotion and must be submitted at the time of application:
a) An updated curriculum vitae of the applicant.
b) For applications for promotion to Full Professor/Librarian:
(i) A list of at least three (3) referees, of which two will be
chosen, from outside the University qualified to assess the
research and creative works of the applicant. In the case of
Members of the alternate teaching stream, the assessors must be
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 42

qualified to assess the professional and teaching qualities of the
applicant as described under Article 2.20, 2. (3).
(ii) A copy of the research and creative works the applicant
wishes to have considered in the examination of the application, it
being understood that the applicant may attach a clear and detailed
description of these works when the works are such that their
physical submission is not practical. Barring unusual
circumstances, it is assumed that all research and creative works
submitted by the applicant will be made available to the external
referees for review.
(iii) In the case of Members of the alternate teaching stream, other
material necessary for an evaluation of the candidate's
performance according to the criteria outlined in Article 2.20, 2.
(e).
7. For promotions to the rank of Full Professor/Librarian, the
Dean/Director of the Library will review each application and determine
whether the candidate meets minimum service requirements and has a
chance of success that is not low. If the determination is negative, the
Dean/Director of the Library will inform the candidate and meet to explain
the determination and to suggest what action should be taken to give a future
application a reasonable chance of success. A written explanation shall be
provided on request. Where the determination is positive or where a
Member who decides to proceed with her/his application in spite of a
negative determination, the Dean/Director of the Library shall ask each full-
time Member of the applicant's unit (or units, as outlined in Article 2.22,
paragraph 2 f i)) for a written assessment, using an appropriate form
designed for the purpose, of the candidate in terms of the relevant criteria for
promotion. The Member’s reports shall be forwarded to the Chair of the
FPC/FFPC/LPC not later than 20 October. Summaries of the assessments
shall be prepared by the Chairperson/Director of the unit and the
Dean/Director of the Library, and shall be made available to the candidate
without attribution of assessors.
For promotion to ranks other that Full Professor these assessments shall
be made available to the applicant as soon as summaries have been
completed but at least one-week before an FPC/FFPC/LPC considers a given
case. For promotions to the rank of Full Professor the summaries will be
completed but not forwarded to the applicant until after the external
assessments have been obtained. At that time the Chair of the
FPC/FFPC/LPC will review the assessments for potential conflict of interest.
8. The Dean/Director of the Library will prepare an
assessment/recommendation for each Member who has applied for
promotion and forward this to the appropriate FPC/FFPC/LPC not later than
31 October. For promotions to the rank of Full Professor/Librarian, the
Dean/Director of the Library may append additional comments to the
assessment within one week of receiving the reports of the external
assessors. These assessments shall be made available to Members as soon as
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 43

they are prepared and at least one week before an FPC/FFPC/LPC considers
a given case.
9. The appropriate FPC/FFPC/LPC shall study each application and all
relevant documentation and shall decide whether the criteria have been met.
In making the decision, the FPC/FFPC/LPC shall refer to:
a) Article 2.00 - Rights, Responsibilities and Duties
b) Article 2.01 - Assessment of a Member's Performance
c) Article 2.20 - Academic Qualifications Guidelines
For appointment/promotion to the rank of Full Professor/ Librarian, the
FPC/FFPC/LPC shall consider the assessment of the Member's scholarly
activity as judged by four (4) external referees. Two (2) of these referees
will be nominated by the candidate if the candidate so requests. Should the
candidate fail to nominate one or both external referees, the Member’s
academic unit will nominate the required referees. The additional external
referees shall be appointed by the Vice-President, Academic after
consultation with the Unit. All external evaluations shall come to
FPC/FFPC/LPC duly signed by the author.
10. Once the external assessment of the applicant's research or creative
works is completed, the FPC/FFPC/LPC shall forward summaries without
identification of author of all solicited information from external referees or
otherwise confidential information to the applicant.
11. When the FPC/FFPC/LPC has completed its inquiries and deliberations
it will forward its decision to the Vice-President, Academic. Except in the
case of applications for promotion to Full Professor/ Librarian, this shall be
done by 15 January. All relevant documentation shall be attached, including
the written comments and evaluations from the unit's (or units’) Members,
the Dean/Director of the Library, the FPC/FFPC/LPC, and in the case of
applications to Full Professor/Librarian, outside referees. A copy of the
FPC/FFPC/LPC's decision shall be forwarded to the Member.
12. Within 30 days of the FPC/FFPC/LPC decision the Vice-President,
Academic shall confirm or refer back, the decision. In the event that the
Vice-President, Academic refers back the decision, the Vice-President,
Academic shall state to the candidate and the FPC/FFPC/LPC, in writing,
the reasons for the action. The Committee must re-examine and address the
Vice-President’s concerns within 21 days. In making a final decision
whether to promote, the Vice-President, Academic shall also take into
consideration any representations made by the Member as well as the
response of the FPC/FFPC/LPC to the specific concerns expressed. The
decision of the Vice-President, Academic whether or not to promote will be
communicated in writing by the Vice-President, Academic to the Member
with a copy to the FPC/FFPC/LPC and to the Association.
13. In the case of Members at the rank of Lecturer/General Librarian who
are awarded a doctoral degree, they shall be promoted to the rank of
Assistant Professor effective January 1 or July 1 whichever next follows the
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 44

award of the degree. The doctorate will be deemed to have been received
when the individual can provide a diploma or a letter from the university
where the doctorate is being obtained indicating that all the conditions for
the doctorate, including the thesis defence and the corrections to the thesis,
have been met. Members must supply a copy of the diploma or of the letter
to their Dean/Director of the Library with a normal application form as well
as an updated C.V. before the promotion procedures will be initiated. In the
case of librarians, Members must also demonstrate that they are holders of a
Master's degree in Library Science if their doctorate is not in Library
Science.
ARTICLE 2.30 - PERSONNEL FILES
1. Official personnel files of a Member shall be kept by the appropriate
Dean of Faculty or the Director of the Library, with copy in the office of the
Vice-President, Academic. There shall be two types of files for Members,
active files and archival files. Active files shall contain only information
allowed under this article. Archival files shall contain material which has
been banned for use in subsequent proceedings as in clauses 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9
of this article but which the University requires for matters other than those
related to this Collective Agreement.
2. Members shall have the right to examine all of their personnel files
during normal business hours, after notice in writing, in the presence of the
Dean/Director of the Library or a person authorised by the Dean/Director of
the Library. Material in the files which is to be held confidential according
to the provisions of this Agreement will be removed from the files prior to
their inspection by the Member. However, an inventory of this confidential
material, certified by the Dean/Director of the Library, will be provided to
the Member, such inventory shall identify all confidential documents by
authorship (if appropriate), date and general subject matter only.
3. Members may request the VP Academic to provide one (1) copy of
their personnel file, excluding confidential material according to the
provisions of this Agreement but including the inventory thereof. Such
requests will be filled within five (5) working days, at no charge to the
Member. One copy of additions made subsequent to the initial copying may
be requested under the same conditions and terms. Requests for additional
copies will be filled at the convenience of the Vice-President, Academic.
4. No anonymous material concerning any Member shall be kept by the
Board for inclusion in the Member's personnel file. Statistical summaries of
student evaluations or written summaries of student comments unrelated to
Senate sanctioned course evaluations, such summaries to exclude
anonymous comments, shall neither be considered anonymous nor
confidential and shall remain available when required by this agreement.
5. Members shall have the right to have all of their files supplemented or
corrected in the event of error, or inadequacy. In the event of alleged
distortion, Members shall have the right to provide additional material for
inclusion in their personnel files. Members shall have the right to request the
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 45

removal from their personnel file of any false, irrelevant or unsubstantiated
material. Such requests shall be made through the Dean/Director of the
Library as appropriate and must be accompanied with reasons why the
material is false, irrelevant or unsubstantiated. In the event of refusal by the
Dean/Director of the Library of such a request, the Dean/Director of the
Library shall provide the Member with reasons why the material is true,
relevant or substantiated, and shall send a copy of that response to LUFA.
Members can grieve according to the provisions of this agreement, providing
only that such grievance is initiated within forty-five (45) working days of
notification by the Board to the Members that the material in dispute is to be
included in their personnel file.
6. Letters of assessments received in relation to the appointment of a
Member shall be confidential and shall not be submitted as evidence in any
subsequent proceedings against that Member.
7. Letters of reprimand are inadmissible evidence if used against a
Member for any purpose when no further disciplinary measures have been
imposed on the Member for two (2) subsequent academic years. In advance
of any proceedings involving the Member, the Dean/Director of the Library
shall remove such letters from the Member's personnel file and place them in
a University depository. The Member shall be notified that this has been
done.
8. All letters or assessments solicited by the FPC/FFPC/LPC and any
summaries thereof shall be kept confidential and used only for the purposes
for which they were solicited in any subsequent proceedings against that
Member.
9. Student evaluations, in numerical or written form, shall not be
admissible as evidence in any process involving a Member's tenure,
promotion or dismissal if such evaluations are more than five (5) years old.
10. A full copy of a Member's file, including all letters of reference and
assessments except those excluded by the provisions of this agreement, shall
be made available to the FPC/FFPC/LPC and the Vice-President, Academic
at their request for the purpose of promotion and tenure evaluation. Such
committees will treat the file as confidential.
11. When confidential information is to be used by the Board in the course
of proceedings to resolve a grievance, the detailed substance of such
confidential information shall be made available at least one (1) week in
advance of the hearing to Members or their duly authorised representative in
a form which does not identify the author. For arbitration, reasonable efforts
will be made to supply the information as soon as practicable, subject to the
above.
12. Where in the opinion of an arbitrator the identity of the author is central
to the resolution of the difference, the arbitrator shall be supplied with the
information and may make use of it as essential to his decision while
maintaining the confidentiality thereof.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 46

13. The Board agrees not to release any individually identifiable
information concerning a Member or Members without the written consent
of the Member(s), except as provided for in Article 1.42 information.
14. In the case of an appeal against dismissal, the contents of the official
personnel file shall be made available to the Member as a true copy if and
when the formal grievance procedure has been initiated using the same
protection of confidentiality as stated in paragraph 11.
ARTICLE 2.40 - DISCIPLINARY MEASURES
1. Discipline of Members by the Board shall be only for just cause. The
disciplinary measures taken shall be commensurate with the just cause.
2. "Just cause" for disciplinary measures shall include:
a) Serious unprofessional behaviour.
b) Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this Agreement,
minor technical violations excepted.
3. The following are the only formal "Disciplinary Measures" which may
be taken by the Board against a Member:
a) A formal reprimand in writing to the Member, specifying the
grounds and adding this reprimand to the personnel file of the Member
concerned.
b) The withholding of an annual increment as per article 4.11 -
Procedures for the Award/Denial of an Annual Increment.
c) The suspension without pay of a Member for a period of one to
five, ten, fifteen or twenty working days. The reduction in pay shall be
computed as 1/365 of normal salary per day of suspension. The
suspension may, at the Vice-President's discretion, be scheduled so as
not to interfere with a Member's teaching/library duties.
4. When a Dean/Director of the Library is satisfied following an
investigation that there is just cause to write a formal reprimand the
Dean/Director of the Library shall do so directly, although the Member has
the right of review per Article 2.30 Personnel Files.
5. When the Vice-President, Academic is satisfied following an
investigation that there is just cause to suspend a Member, the Vice-President
shall do so by written communication to the Member, setting out therein the
reasons therefor.
6. Cases involving the inability of a Member to perform reasonable duties
by reason of physical or emotional illness shall be treated separately from
cases for disciplinary measures. If sickness or disability is proven, leave
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 47

shall be granted and the case dealt with within the University sickness and
disability provisions. In exceptional cases when behaviour providing
grounds for disciplinary measures is judged to be due to illness and the
Member refuses to be placed under the sickness and disability provisions of
this Agreement, disciplinary procedures may be initiated.
7. Grievances regarding disciplinary measures against Sessional Members
shall be dealt with by the procedures in Article 2.95-7.
ARTICLE 2.41 - DISMISSAL PROCEDURES
1. "Dismissal" means the termination for just cause of a term appointment
or a probationary appointment before the end of the stated contractual
period, or the termination of a tenure appointment for cause at any time other
than normal retirement. Neither the failure to renew a term or probationary
appointment at the end of the defined term nor the decision not to grant
tenure, nor termination of an appointment for the purpose of retirement,
provided these actions are in accordance with this Agreement, constitutes
dismissal.
2. Just cause shall be defined as:
a) Gross misconduct.
b) Persistent failure to discharge academic responsibilities as defined
in this Agreement either through incompetence or neglect of duties.
3. a) Cases involving the inability of a Member to perform
reasonable duties by reason of physical or emotional illness shall be
treated separately from cases of dismissal for cause.
b) Where such inability has been established, leave shall be granted
and the case dealt with within the University sickness and disability
provisions according to Article 3.4.
c) If the Member refuses to comply with the requirements of the
University's sickness and disability provisions, e.g. refuses a medical
examination required by the University pursuant to Article 3.4 or
policies of the company carrying the insurance or refuses the leave
associated with these procedures, the President may proceed to lay
dismissal charges.
d) If the President proceeds with dismissal for cause, it shall be a
sufficient defence to prevent dismissal for the Member to establish that
failure to perform reasonable duties arose from physical or emotional
illness.
e) If Members are on sickness or disability leave and consider that
they have recovered and are capable of undertaking normal academic
activities, they shall present medical evidence from a medical
practitioner to their Dean/Director of the Library. If the Dean/Director
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 48

of the Library agrees, the Members shall be reinstated with full rights
and benefits forthwith. If the Dean/Director of the Library disagrees,
the Dean/Director of the Library shall require the opinion of two (2)
additional medical practitioners named by agreement with the Member,
or if there is no agreement, by the O.M.A. The majority opinion of the
three (3) medical practitioners shall prevail. The Board shall pay the
cost of such additional medical examinations required by it.
4. Where the Dean/Director of the Library is satisfied that there is just
cause to warrant dismissal proceedings, the Dean/Director of the Library
shall make a recommendation, in writing to the President.
5. The President of the University may, by written notice for stated cause,
suspend Members from some or all of their University duties and withdraw
some or all of their University privileges, excluding membership in Senate,
provided that dismissal procedures or procedures related to physical or
emotional incapacity to perform reasonable duties (see 3 above), have
already been initiated or are initiated within 24 hours. The suspension shall
terminate with the conclusion of the dismissal or other proceedings, or at
such earlier time as the President may deem appropriate. The stated cause
must involve a situation perceived by the President as an immediate threat to
the functioning of the University, or to any member of the University. Salary
and other benefits shall continue throughout the period of suspension.
6. If the President is satisfied that there is a prima facie case the President
shall initiate dismissal proceedings in the following manner. The President
shall notify the Member of the Dean's/Director of the Library's
recommendation and request that the Member meet with the President, and
such person as the President may wish, for a discussion of the case. In this
and all further proceedings, an advisor may accompany the Member. If this
attempt fails to settle the matter, or if the Member refuses to meet with the
President, the Member shall be informed by the President, in writing, by
registered mail, of the reasons for the dismissal proceedings against the
Member in sufficient detail to enable the Member to prepare a response.
7. If the Member's whereabouts are unknown to the University and the
Association, the meeting contemplated in (6) above shall be dispensed with
and the President may immediately give notice of dismissal by registered
mail addressed to the Member's last known address.
8. The Association is entitled to carry forward a grievance on behalf of the
Member commencing at step 2 of the grievance and arbitration procedure
and proceeding through the grievance and arbitration provisions of this
Agreement.
ARTICLE 2.50 - RETIREMENT
1. Normal Retirement Date
The normal retirement date of a Member shall be the first day of July
next following the attainment of age 65, unless the member's 65th birthday
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 49

falls on the first day of July, in which case the Normal Retirement Date shall
coincide with the Member's 65th birthday.
2. Optional Retirement Dates
a) Early Retirement
Early retirement shall be governed by the regulations of the
Laurentian University Pension Plan or if applicable by the terms of the
Special Voluntary Early Retirement Plan, Appendix C.
b) Postponed Retirement
(i) The Board may, at its discretion and with the approval or
request of a unit invite Members to postpone retirement beyond
the normal retirement date. Such postponement shall be on a year
by year basis, except that the postponement of the start of the
retirement annuity may not be continued past the Member's
seventy-first birthday.
(ii) If Members elect to continue their contributions to their
Money Purchase Account after the normal retirement date, the
Employer will also continue its contribution to that account on the
Member's behalf. However, no employee or employer
contributions will be made after the Member's seventy-first
birthday. A postponed retirement shall be on a year by year basis
whether full-time or part-time, except that the postponement of the
start of the retirement annuity may not be continued past the
Member's seventy-first birthday. Members who postpone their
retirement will receive an actuarially increased annuity.
c) Retirement at Dates Other than July 1st.
Subject to paragraphs 2a) and 2b) and in unusual circumstances a
Member may request and the Pension Committee may approve the
request, retirement, at a date other than July 1st. In this instance, an
annuity shall be purchased as of the next date the Board will have
available to it the evaluation of the total fund as of the day preceding -
that is, 1 October, 1 January, and 1 April.
If such a request is made approved and implemented, only that
Member's share of the net growth of the fund to the day preceding will
be allocated.
3. Members retired from this University shall retain:
a) The right to their title and the listing of their name and their title in
a special section at the back of the University Calendar, until the death
of the Member.
b) The same library privileges as full-time Members, free parking in
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 50

facilities available to full-time Members, and such other University
facilities as may be granted by the Vice-President, Academic at his/her
discretion.
c) The same exemption from tuition fees for themselves, their
spouses, and their dependants as full-time Members, as per Article 4.53.
d) The same eligibility for free Physical Education Centre
membership for themselves, their spouses and their dependants as
full-time Members, as per Article 4.56.
4. To honour an outstanding contribution in an academic field, the Board
may, in accordance with Senate policy, bestow the title of
Professor/Librarian Emeritus upon a retiring Member.
ARTICLE 2.51 - RESIGNATION
1. Normally a Member may resign effective 30 June or 30 December,
with at least one month's written notice to the Vice-President, Academic. All
leaves to which a resigning Member would be entitled must be terminated at
that date.
2. Employment may be terminated at any time by mutual written
agreement between a Member and the Vice-President, Academic.
ARTICLE 2.60 - FACULTY/FRANCOPHONE FACULTY/LIBRARY
PERSONNEL COMMITTEE
1. Structure of the FPC/FFPC/LPC
a) In each Faculty there shall be a Faculty Personnel Committee
(FPC) composed of seven (7) elected Members plus one alternate. A
Dean/Director of the Library appointed by the Vice-President,
Academic shall be the non-voting Chair. All Members of the FPC must
be tenured and no more than two (2) Members shall belong to the same
academic unit. Except as provided in (c), at least three (3) Members
shall be Full Professors from within that Faculty. Every effort shall be
made to seek nominations from female Members.
b) There shall also be a Francophone Faculty Personnel Committee
(FFPC) composed of eight (8) members, two from each of the four
existing Faculties. The elected member with the lowest number of
votes shall serve as the alternate. A Dean/Director of the Library
appointed by the Vice-President, Academic (Francophone Affairs) shall
be the non-voting Chair. All members of the FFPC must be tenured and
qualified Francophone Members i.e. must have taught or be scheduled
to teach a course in French at Laurentian. Except as provided in d), at
least three (3) Members shall be Full Professors. Potential candidates
will be identified by the Office of the Vice-President, Academic
(Francophone Affairs). Every effort shall be made to seek nominations
from female Members.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 51

If a Member wishes to have his/her case heard by the Francophone
Faculty Personnel Committee, this intention must be indicated in
writing at the time the application is made; otherwise the application
will be heard by the appropriate FPC. Applications are to be sent to the
appropriate Dean who will forward these to the non-voting Chair of the
Francophone Faculty Personnel Committee. Once a Member has
selected a Committee, he/she is not free to change to another
Committee either in that academic year or in the following year if the
application was unsuccessful.
c) In the Library, there shall be a Library Personnel Committee
(LPC) composed of five (5) elected Members and one (1) alternate. A
Dean appointed by the Vice-President, Academic shall be the non-
voting Chair. All Members of the LPC must be tenured and except as
provided in (d), two (2) Members shall be Full Professors/Librarians.
There shall be at least two (2) Members from the Library and at least
two (2) must be Members of a Faculty outside the Library. Every effort
shall be made to seek nominations from female Members. In the event
that a Member from the Library wishes to have his/her case heard by a
Francophone Faculty Personnel Committee the Parties will reach
agreement on the composition of such a Committee by Memorandum
of Agreement.
d) In the event that the requirements in (a) (b) or (c) above cannot be
met, the first priority in dealing with insufficient Members at a rank
shall be to seek nominations by members of that Faculty/Library of
Members of another Faculty/Library at the required rank. The second
priority shall be to seek nominations by members of that
Faculty/Library of Members from the next lower rank within the same
Faculty/Library.
2. Election of the FPC/FFPC/LPC Members
a) The Secretary of Senate shall conduct the elections of the
Faculty/Library Personnel Committees by September 30 of each year.
The Board and the Association each shall appoint one (1) scrutineer for
the elections.
b) Nominations shall be by Members of each Faculty/Library.
Voting shall be by Members of the faculty/library for Members of their
own FPC/FFPC/LPC. Qualified Francophone Members may vote in
the elections for faculty representatives on both the FPC and FFPC.
Elections shall be conducted in the office of the Secretary of Senate by
secret preferential ballot. Except as described in 1.b) the alternate will
be the nominee, not elected who received the greatest number of votes.
c) Any tenured Member may be a member of the FPC/FFPC/LPC it
being understood that:
(i) No Vice-Dean may be a committee member.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 52

(ii) The President of LUFA and the Chief Grievance Officer of
LUFA may not be committee members.
(iii) An elected member may not serve for more than two (2)
consecutive terms.
(iv) A Member may not be a committee member during the
academic year s/he is on sabbatical.
(v) No Member may serve on more than one FPC/FFPC/LPC in
the same academic year.
d) In the event that any positions of an FPC/FFPC/LPC are not filled
through the election process outlined, the Dean of the Faculty/Director
of the Library, or in the case of the FFPC, The Vice-President
(Francophone Affairs) and an appointee of the LUFA Board shall seek,
within five (5) working days, a mutually acceptable candidate(s) who
shall be named to serve.
3. Term of Office and Vacancies
a) The term of office of elected and appointed FPC/FFPC/LPC
members shall be two (2) years, starting on September 30 following the
election. To ensure continuity, the terms shall be staggered.
b) A committee member who makes an application for promotion or
for whatever reason is being evaluated by the FPC/FFPC/LPC shall be
deemed to have resigned from the committee.
c) In the event that replacements are needed, the Dean of the
Faculty/Director of the Library or in the case of the FFPC, the Vice-
President, Academic (Francophone Affairs) and an appointee of the
LUFA Board shall (subject to 1. above) seek a mutually acceptable
tenured candidate who shall be named to serve.
4. Voting, Recording and Reporting Procedures
a) A quorum shall consist of the full committee. The alternate may
replace any elected Member when needed to obtain quorum.
b) The alternate Member shall act in the absence of a regular
Member in order to obtain quorum. A regular Member who is unable to
attend meetings shall so inform the Chairperson. The Chairperson shall
formally invite the alternate to replace the regular member. The
alternate Member shall be kept informed of Committee proceedings
and shall be invited to attend all meetings. The alternate member has
an obligation to stay abreast of the matters discussed.
c) All decisions of the Committee shall be recorded. In order to
establish which factors were persuasive in any given decision, the
FPC/FFPC/LPC shall set forth in its decision its findings and the
grounds for its decision. These decisions shall be kept in the office of
the Dean/Director of the Library and in the case of the FFPC, in the
office of the appropriate Dean and shall be available to the members of
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 53

the Committee. Committee members shall make their decisions in a
manner consistent with the Collective Agreement. A copy of the
decisions shall be forwarded to the candidate. Each decision shall
contain the following paragraph: "The Member may make written
representations to the Vice-President, Academic within ten (10)
working days of the date on which the FPC/FFPC/LPC forwards to the
Member a copy of its decision to the Vice-President, Academic."
d) Decisions of the FPC/FFPC/LPC on renewal shall be by majority
vote. Decisions of the FPC/FFPC on tenure and promotion shall
require five (5) positive votes. Decisions of the LPC on tenure and
promotion shall require four (4) positive votes. Members of the
committee shall record their vote on an official ballot with their name
on it and shall write on the ballot a reasonable opinion supporting the
vote. The Chairperson shall rely on these opinions in writing the
committee's decision. Prior to sending the committee's decision to the
Vice-President, Academic, the report must be brought to
FPC/FFPC/LPC for review. Members of the committee who wish to
add a minority opinion may do so by submitting a written signed
opinion which will be attached to the majority decision. Official ballots
shall be retained until all procedures up to and including arbitration
have been exhausted.
e) Prior to the end of each academic year, the chairperson of the
FPC/FFPC/LPC shall make an annual report to the Vice-President,
Academic summarising the activities and decisions of the
FPC/FFPC/LPC. This report shall indicate all decisions that were
referred back to the FPC/FFPC/LPC by the Vice-President, Academic.
A copy of this annual report shall also be sent to the President of LUFA.
5. Operating Procedures
The Chairs of FPC/FFPC/LPC shall ensure that at the commencement
of evaluations for promotion and tenure, all members of the Committee are
familiar with the employment equity policies.
a) No member of an FPC/FFPC/LPC shall participate in the
evaluation/assessment of Members at the unit level.
b) (i) At least two weeks before the FPC/FFPC/LPC considers
individual cases, the Chair will mail to each applicant a list of
Committee Members and request that the applicant state in writing
whether there exists a conflict of interest with any member of the
Committee. It is the responsibility of the Chair of the committee
to assure that each applicant completes this declaration before
his/her case is heard. An applicant will not be allowed to declare a
conflict of interest once the FPC/FFPC/LPC has started to discuss
that particular case.
(ii) If an applicant believes that a conflict of interest exists with
any member of the FPC/FFPC/LPC, she/he will state the reasons
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 54

in writing to the Chair of the Committee in sufficient detail to
allow the Committee to assess the merits of the claim. The
Committee will vote on the issue and if at least three members of
the Committee are of the view that a conflict of interest exists the
member of the Committee will be replaced by the alternate.
A member of the FPC/FFPC/LPC may declare a conflict of
interest with the applicant and may withdraw from the Committee
for that particular case.
If the Chair of the FPC/FFPC/LPC perceives a conflict of interest
that has not been declared by either the applicant or the member of
the Committee, the Chair may raise the matter with the Committee
member and/or the applicant and, if not satisfied with the response
with the entire FPC/FFPC/LPC. A vote by simple majority of the
FPC/FFPC/LPC will resolve the issue of whether or not a conflict
of interest exists.
If a conflict of interest exists with two or more members of the
Committee, the Chair of the FPC/FFPC/LPC will find
replacements according to the procedures of Article 2.60.
(iii) In arriving at a decision on conflicts of interest, the
Committee will be guided by the following principles. A conflict
of interest occurs when a person has a duty to fairly decide or vote
on an issue and there is a reasonable presumption that the person
stands to benefit or be harmed from a certain resolution of the
issue.
In the context of collegial decision making, prior service in the
same department or school, joint service on University or LUFA
committees or other normal acquaintance by itself does not
constitute grounds for the presumption of a conflict of interest.
c) Before making any decision or recommendation on any individual
Member, the FPC/FFPC/LPC shall:
(i) Invite the Member to meet with the FPC/FFPC/LPC. The
Member may be accompanied by a colleague of his/her choice.
(ii) Take into account but not be limited to the following
evidence:
-Those parts of the Member's current personnel file that are
relevant to the matter being discussed. The Member shall be
provided with a list of material from the personnel file that is
being considered and that has not accompanied the
application.
-The assessments by the Members of the unit(s) and by the
Dean/Director of the Library.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 55

-Any relevant material specified in the candidate's letter of
application or curriculum vitae. The candidate shall be
responsible within reason for producing one true copy of any
material that he/she wishes to be considered.
-The oral and/or written submission made by the candidate.
-Such other factual information as is necessary to understand
the evidence.
d) Once an FPC/FFPC/LPC has started to consider a case, it shall be
the responsibility of that FPC/FFPC/LPC to see that case through
to completion even if the process extends beyond one academic
year. In the event that replacements are needed, the Dean/Director
of the Library and an appointee of the LUFA Board shall (subject
to Article 2.60 1. above) seek a mutually acceptable tenured
Member(s) who shall be named to serve.
6. Responsibilities of the FPC/FFPC/LPC
a) To make and place in the personnel files an evaluation in
accordance with Article 4.11 - Procedures for the Award/ Denial of an
Annual Increment,
b) To formulate and forward to the Vice-President, Academic its
decisions for those Members of the Faculty/Library whose names are
being considered for the following:
(i) Promotion per Article 2.23
(ii) Tenure per Article 2.22
(iii) Renewal of Probationary Appointment per Article 2.21
(iv) Merit increments as per Article 4.20.
c) To make submissions on such matters as termination due to
redundancy or financial exigency when requested to do so.
d) To act as consultant on any other matters as requested by the
University or required by the terms of this Agreement.
7. Deadlines
In the event that an FPC/FFPC/LPC is unable to meet any of the
deadlines set out in this Collective Agreement by virtue of its inability to
meet with quorum, then all subsequent deadlines in the particular procedure
are extended by the length of time that FPC/FFPC/LPC requires to meet with
quorum and make its decision or recommendation.
ARTICLE 2.70 - RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT SUPPORT
a) For each of the years of the Collective Agreement the Board will
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 56

provide to the Director of Graduate Studies and Research to enhance
scholarly productivity through an open competition among Members:
Year 2002-2003 $118,000
Year 2003-2004 $120,500
Year 2004-2005 $123,000
b) In each of the academic years 2002-2003, 2003-2004 and 2004-2005 the
Board will provide the sum of $55,000 to assist Members in the task of
obtaining and/or upgrading computer equipment. Out of the total amount,
up to $8,000, will be available for Sessional Instructors. Each eligible
faculty member will be entitled to a subsidy of $800 (or to a lesser amount as
may be determined by the committee below) for the purpose of purchasing a
computer. A committee of two members selected by LUFA and two
members selected by the Administration will oversee the distribution of
funds. Newly appointed full-time faculty members are entitled to receive at
no cost a ‘standard computer’ as determined by Computer Services. In the
event that such members wish to purchase a different computer they shall be
entitled to the subsidy. If funds are limited, priority will be given to
members who have not previously received a subsidy. Funds not spent in
any given year may be carried forward to the following year.
ARTICLE 2.90 - SESSIONAL APPOINTMENT PROVISIONS
The Parties recognise that the University's mission is best served by a largely
full-time faculty and that it is not generally desirable to make sessional
appointments a substitute for full-time faculty.
At the same time, the Parties recognise that sessional faculty add a
significant level of diversity, expertise and practical experience to the
University, and their value must be recognised in the governance and
decision-making processes and generally in the on-going life of the
University.
Teaching/professional librarianship duties comprise the only assigned
function for Sessional Instructors.
ARTICLE 2.91 - SESSIONAL TEACHING RIGHTS AND
RESPONSIBILITIES
1. Sessional Members shall be covered by the general provisions
regarding teaching and professional librarianship of Article 2.00 paragraph 3,
A1 Teaching and A2 Professional Librarianship except for specific clauses
within this section that clearly apply only to full-time faculty.
2. The Chair/Director of the Unit responsible for a course shall, in
consultation with and subject to the approval of the Dean, bear primary
responsibility for the supervision of the teaching of Sessional Members.
3. The Chair/Director of the Unit shall structure the procedures required
by this responsibility in a reasonable manner.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 57

4. The Chair/Director of the Unit shall make procedures regarding
Sessional Members a matter of record.
5. In all cases where a personnel action affecting Sessional Members is
required, the action shall be an action of the full Departmental/School
Council, even where general supervision is delegated to the chair, to a
coordinator, or to a committee.
6. The Department shall receive brief written reports from Sessional
Members for each course taught.
7. Copies of course evaluations of Sessional Members shall be made
available to the Department by the Dean.
ARTICLE 2.92 - SESSIONAL WORKLOAD PROVISIONS
1. a) If, once a contract has been executed, the workload of a
Sessional Instructor must be altered,the agreement of the Member must
be obtained.
b) Once a contract has been executed with a Sessional Instructor,
such a contract shall not be cancelled in order to have the duties
performed by a faculty Member with a full-time appointment.
c) Cancellation prior to its commencement of a course for which a
contract with a Sessional Instructor has been executed can occur only in
accordance with cancellation clause provisions contained in the
contract.
d) Cancellation clauses shall be used only where there is good reason
to believe that enrolment levels may be vulnerable. In the event of a
cancellation the employer shall:
(i) Attempt to find work of equivalent value for which the
Sessional Member is qualified; and failing this
(ii) Shall pay a cancellation fee of 15% of the agreed salary as
outlined in the Letter of Appointment for courses taught during the
Fall and Winter Terms; or
(iii) Shall pay a fixed amount of $125 per 3-credit course, to be
stated in the Letter of Appointment, for courses taught during the
Spring Session.
Sessional Instructors shall accrue Sessional Seniority for all cancelled
courses once they have achieved establishment. Cancelled courses
shall not count toward establishment.
2. The contracts issued to Sessional Librarians shall identify in reasonable
detail the hours during which the work is to be performed. These hours
cannot be changed without the consent of the Member. The librarian pay
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 58

equivalent shall be deemed to be (___) hours per course credit of pay (the
figure used here to be agreed by the parties prior to any use of this
provision).
3. The workload of a Sessional Member shall normally not exceed twelve
credits per Fall/Winter session (September to April) or six credits per Spring
session (May to August).
ARTICLE 2.93 - ANNUAL REPORT FOR SESSIONAL
MEMBERS
Sessional Members shall submit brief annual reports to their Departments.
Teaching Dossiers may also be submitted, at the option of the Member.
Departments shall make copies of these reports available to the Dean on
request.
ARTICLE 2.94 - SESSIONAL APPOINTMENT AND RENEWAL
A. Appointment of Sessional Members of the Bargaining Unit
1. Appointments of Sessional Instructors are made by the
Vice-President Academic or his/her designate on behalf of the Board of
Governors and on the recommendation of the Dean/Director of the
Library and the Department/School concerned.
2. Sessional appointments and other extra-departmental assignments of
courses shall be made from rosters of names of potential instructors
maintained by the Departments or Units responsible for the particular
course. This will enable appointments to be made expeditiously and at the
same time in a way that honours Members' seniority and other rights.
3. Those seeking employment in a particular term must give notice to
the Department that they wish their name to be added to, or to remain on,
the roster. This shall be done by 1 March for the following winter session
and by 1 November for the following spring session. Such notice must
specify clearly the course, courses, or type of course to which it applies.
4. A letter of application, a current CV and relevant supporting
documentation must be filed with the Department by the above dates.
Notice may be given simply to bring forward a letter of application for
previous sessions, but CV's must be kept up to date.
5. Members may have their names added to the rosters after the above
dates. In such cases seniority and other rights shall not be enforceable.
6. Departments shall not be precluded from advertising or otherwise
soliciting applications to their rosters, either before or after the above
dates.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 59

7. When courses cannot be made part of Full-time Members’ normal
teaching loads they shall be offered by the Department in the form of
overload appointments or sessional contracts. Full-time Members,
previous and current Sessional Members, Retirees, and other qualified
candidates may apply for these contracts. In awarding them, the
Chair/Director of the Unit, in consultation with the appropriate Dean shall
follow the criteria for establishment and seniority listed in 2.94 B. and
2.94 C below, and for overloads in Article 2.10.6.b.
For Full-time Members who retired prior to 1 July 2002, the
provisions stipulated in Article 2.94 in the 1999-2002 Collective
Agreement shall apply.
8. During October of each year the employer will circulate to all
Departments/Schools, LUFA and the Library a list of courses taught on an
overload basis by Full-time Members of faculty or by Sessional Members
during the two previous academic years. The list will also be posted in
the Library Electronic Bulletin Board. Departments and Schools will be
requested to post these lists on their respective Bulletin Boards. All
courses listed will be deemed to have been posted.
9. When a Sessional appointment will be required for any other course,
an advertisement shall be posted on a bulletin board by the Academic unit
with a copy sent to LUFA and to the Library. The list will also be posted
in the Library Electronic Bulletin Board. The rosters shall remain open
until ten working days after the posting on the bulletin board by the
Academic Unit. Any outstanding course may be advertised locally.
10. Full-time Members wishing to teach courses for which units other
than their own are responsible shall be governed by the same procedures
and dates as Sessional Members. Article 2.10-Academic Workload and
Article 4.30-Overloads also govern such assignments.
11. In exceptional circumstances where appointments must be made
shortly before, or even after, the commencement of instruction, and where
time does not allow full compliance with the above procedures (e.g., in
cases of illness of a Member originally scheduled to teach; opening of a
new section of a course(s); unanticipated commencements of Leaves of
Absence, etc.) the ten-day period referred to above shall be waived, but
the Board of Governors undertakes that reasonable efforts will be made
not to violate the appointment rights and seniority protection of Members
intended by the foregoing. The Board shall inform the Association of
each appointment made under this clause and the circumstances thereof
forthwith. Any individual so appointed shall provide a letter of
application and a current CV.
B. Establishment
1. Sessional Members shall be deemed to have Establishment status
with respect of a particular course once they have been appointed to teach
it for their third academic year. Such sessional contracts need not be in
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 60

consecutive academic years, but in no case shall exceed the previous six
academic years.
2. Full-time Members seeking overload appointments shall be deemed
to have Establishment status with respect to a particular course once they
have taught a course for the third year on overload appointment or they
have taught a course as part of their regular workload three times or a
combination thereof. Such overload appointment or teaching need not be
in consecutive academic years, but in no case shall exceed the previous
six academic years.
3. Retirees shall be deemed to have Establishment status with respect to
a particular course either when they have taught a course for the third year
on sessional contracts or when they have taught a course as part of their
regular workload twice and have been hired at least once to teach a course
on a sessional contract. Such sessional contracts or teaching need not be
in consecutive academic years, but in no case shall exceed the previous
six academic years.
4. The names of Established Sessional Instructors shall be printed in the
departmental faculty listings of the next edition of the Laurentian
University Calendar following a year in which an appointment is held.
C. Seniority
1. A Member with Establishment status shall accrue seniority credits
with respect to a particular course. Where a course is replaced by a
renamed, renumbered, or revised version of what is essentially the same
course, or is replaced by a course that performs the same function in the
Department's curriculum, seniority status shall apply to such a new
course.
2. Members with Establishment shall accrue seniority credit each time
they teach a course. Members teaching a particular course more than once
in an academic year, shall accrue seniority credit each time they teach the
course. This shall include one-term courses and shall include the spring
session or other extra sessions of that academic year.
3. Members with Establishment and with highest seniority shall have
first right of reappointment, subject to notice of those rights with respect
to a particular term, as specified above. This shall apply only once the
Member has achieved Establishment status. Seniority entitlement shall,
during the fall, winter, and spring sessions, be limited to one section per
term for each course in which a Member holds seniority. (Such rights are
also governed by limitations described in article 2.92.3.)
4. Years of Seniority shall be the number of years in which a Member
qualifies for seniority dated back to 1984. The onus shall be on the
Member to establish his years of seniority prior to the above roster dates
pertinent to the relevant session. Evidence might include, but is not
limited to, any of the following in which clear identification is made:
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 61

letters of appointment, pay records, University and Continuing Education
calendars, course evaluations, grade sheets, administrative letters referring
to the course. When requested, the Dean with authority for the course in
question shall issue a written statement agreeing to reasonably established
seniority claims.
5. Seniority shall be retained during academic years in which a
Sessional Instructor is not offered reappointment, but shall not be
increased during those academic years. Seniority shall not however be
able to be exercised if the Sessional Instructor has not been offered
reappointment over three consecutive academic years.
6. However, Seniority shall not be exercised if a Sessional Instructor
has removed his/her name from a roster, or has declined an offer of
appointment, for a second consecutive academic year.
7. Notwithstanding the foregoing, Sessional Instructors may request
leave from a roster for up to two consecutive years for parenting,
adoption, or full-time graduate studies. Such application shall be made on
a one-year-at-a-time basis and shall not be unreasonably refused. In such
cases seniority shall accrue in respect of the years of leave.
D. Written Offer of Appointment
1. The Parties agree that Offers of Appointment shall be sent to
Sessional Instructors as soon as possible before classes commence.
Except for situations covered by Article 2.94, A, section 11, the Board
shall endeavour to mail Offers of Appointment by the following dates:
July 15 for the Fall Term, November 15 for the Winter Term, and March
15 for the Spring Term.
Each Offer of Appointment shall specify the course number(s), the
number of credits, terms and conditions of employment including salary,
benefits, sessional seniority, and cancellation conditions if applicable.
2. A copy of the current Collective Agreement shall be sent with any
offer of employment, except where the applicant would already have
received a copy.
3. A copy of each accepted Offer of Appointment shall be sent to the
Association forthwith.
E. Grievance of Appointment Decision
1. In the event that an unsuccessful applicant for a sessional teaching
position believes that someone else was appointed to the position in
violation of the provisions of this Agreement, s/he may request within one
month of the decision a review of the appointment with the view of
establishing whether the Board acted in accordance with the provisions of
this Agreement when not appointing the unsuccessful candidate.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 62

2. Such a request for review shall be directed to the Dean and/or the
Association and shall involve initially an informal stage in which the
Dean and a Grievance Officer appointed by the Association have an
opportunity to review the available information. If agreement cannot be
reached at the informal stage, the matter shall be referred to the Joint
Grievance Committee. (See Article 8.3.)
3. In the event that the Joint Grievance Committee finds that the
unsuccessful candidate should have been appointed by the board by virtue
of the provisions of this Agreement instead of the successful one, the
former shall be entitled to compensation. The amount of compensation
and seniority credit shall be determined by the Joint Grievance Committee
but shall not exceed the maximum amount of the contract that should have
been issued to the unsuccessful candidate.
ARTICLE 2.95 - WITHDRAWAL OF SENIORITY
1. The rights established by the provisions for seniority as described
above may be altered or revoked in the event that the teaching performance
of a Sessional Member is found to be unsatisfactory. Action that may affect
the seniority rights of a Sessional Member may be initiated at the request of
the Chair of the Academic Unit or the Dean and will normally occur only
after an informal investigation establishes reasonable grounds for a formal
procedure. There is an expectation that the Sessional Member will be made
aware during the informal stage of an investigation of the concerns regarding
his/her teaching performance and will be given an opportunity to give
reasons why a formal procedure should not be initiated. The member will be
advised of his/her right to union representation.
2. If after an informal investigation the Chair of the Academic Unit and
the Dean are of the view that a formal procedure is warranted an
investigation shall be conducted by the Departmental/School Council or a
specially formed committee that reports back to the Council. LUFA shall be
advised that this procedure will be invoked. Academic units shall have
reasonable flexibility in the constitution of such a committee. In all cases the
investigating body must have at least four members who shall attend all
meetings convened. Membership shall include the departmental chair, at
least one other Full-time Member of the Department, at least one Sessional
Member from the department (if there is one willing to serve), and a
nominee of the Sessional Member under investigation (such nominee must
be a Full-time or Sessional Member teaching in the Department during the
current academic year).
3. The Member under investigation shall have the right to a full and
reasonable statement of the Department's reasons for initiating the
investigation. The Member shall have the right to examine all evidence
under consideration at least ten working days before any final determination
is made and make counter-representation on it in writing or in person or
both. The Member shall have the right to be accompanied by a colleague.
4. The investigating committee shall present its findings to the Academic
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 63

Unit Council stating the reasons for its conclusions in reasonable detail. The
decision of the Council, which may differ from that of the Committee, shall
be forwarded to the Dean for action.
5. The Council's determination may request that the Member be cautioned
or that the Employer's seniority obligation to the Sessional Member be
revoked or that the Member be placed on probation for the duration of one
course and that a further determination be made at the conclusion of that
course.
6. The Dean may accept the recommendation, reject it, or refer it back to
the Department for further consideration.
7. If the Dean decides on revocation of seniority rights, he shall advise the
member and LUFA in writing, stating reasons. The Member shall have the
right to request an appeal within ten working days of the receipt of that
communication. The appeal shall be heard by a special FPC/FFPC, which
shall consist of the regular FPC/FFPC, augmented by one Sessional
Instructor nominated by LUFA who will not vote. The Sessional Member
shall have the right to be heard, to be accompanied by a colleague, to
examine any evidence with at least ten days notice and to present counter-
representation on it. The appeal body shall determine the case by simple
majority. No further arbitration or appeal shall be open to the Member or the
Board.
8 Where an appeal is determined in favour of a Sessional Member, and
where the course has been, or comes to be, scheduled for the following
academic year, the Sessional Member, subject to seniority, shall be assigned
to, and paid for such a course or courses. Any other Sessional Member
assigned in anticipation of a determination against a Sessional Member
against whom withdrawal of seniority is anticipated shall be entitled to
compensation.
9 Withdrawal of Seniority actions must first be initiated (as per section 1
above) by 1 June in order to be effective for the subsequent academic year.
ARTICLE 3.0 - RECOGNIZED AND OTHER HOLIDAYS
The following days and all days generally declared to be recognised holidays
by Federal or Provincial authorities are recognised holidays and paid time
off shall therefore be given to the Members on:
a) Founder's Day, Good Friday, Easter Monday, Victoria Day,
Canada Day, August Civic Holiday, Labour Day, Thanksgiving Day,
Christmas Day, Boxing Day, New Year's Day.
b) And on such other holidays as declared by the Board, including
the customary Christmas recess.
ARTICLE 3.1 - VACATION
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 64

1. Vacation is the period during which a Member is not accountable to the
University.
2. In addition to recognised holidays, each Member is entitled to a
vacation of one (1) month or twenty-three (23) working days, after eleven
(11) months of service and annually thereafter. Members on contracts of less
than one (1) year duration are entitled to a pro-rated period of vacation.
When Members have accumulated five full consecutive years of
employment at the University, for each year of employment thereafter they
shall be entitled to an additional two days of vacation to a maximum
entitlement of 33 working days.
3. The Members will be paid during vacation periods but there shall be no
remuneration in lieu of vacation in the event that the Members choose not to
take their vacation allowance.
4. The Members are required to take the vacation to which they are
entitled. Vacation may not be accumulated from year to year. The Members
are required to take their vacation between Spring Convocation and Labour
Day, unless prior permission has been granted by the Dean/Director of the
Library. Members may take their annual vacation at any time within that
period provided that:
a) The period of the vacation does not conflict with a time during
which the Members have scheduled duties assigned to them.
b) The Members have indicated the dates of their vacation to the
Dean/Director of the Library, through their Chairperson/Director at
least one (1) month in advance.
5. In the event of the death of Members, the value of any unused vacation
entitlement will be paid to their beneficiary.
ARTICLE 3.21 - SABBATICAL LEAVES
1. Preamble
In recognition of the fact that regular stream Members including
Librarians are required to continue to develop as scholars and researchers
throughout their careers, the University maintains a policy of sabbatical
leave intended for academic study, research or writing which will be
mutually beneficial to the Member and the institution. For this purpose,
sabbatical leave is defined as a period during which a Member is relieved of
normal duties in order to:
a) Engage in further training, advanced studies or courses at a study
or research centre, including language study.
b) Devote more time to scholarly activity as per Article 2.00.
c) Improve the University's relations with other universities or
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 65

countries in the capacity of a visiting professor or visiting librarian.
d) Gain practical or professional experience in a field connected with
the Members' academic or professional specialisation which will enable
them to give instruction or, in the case of the library, service that is
more complete and suitable to the requirements of the time.
In recognition of the fact that alternate stream Members are required to
continue to develop as professionals and teachers throughout their careers,
the University maintains a policy of sabbatical leave intended for
professional development, which will be mutually beneficial to the Member
and the unit. For this purpose, sabbatical leave is defined as a period during
which Members are relieved of normal duties in order to gain practical or
professional experience in the Members' specialisation which will enable
them to give instruction that is more relevant and current.
Members who are on sabbatical leave and who elect to remain on
campus for all or part of the duration of the leave shall not normally be
assigned any formal workload nor shall they normally participate in any
formal activities of the University other than those required by this
Agreement.
The Board will replace Members on sabbatical leave when it deems it
necessary. The Board retains the right to limit the number granted leave in
keeping with its academic responsibilities.
2. Eligibility
Eligibility for sabbatical leave is subject to the following conditions:
a) Members must have been full-time faculty Members of the
University for the past six- (6) consecutive years, holding the rank of
either Full Professor/Librarian, Associate Professor/ Librarian, or
Assistant Professor/Librarian at the time of application. They must be
tenured at the time their sabbatical leave begins. Members who have
been previously employed by the University on a full-time basis in
limited term positions and who are subsequently hired in a tenure track
position, shall have their previous time of employment counted towards
sabbatical eligibility. In exceptional circumstances tenured
Lecturers/General Librarians with the requisite years at Laurentian are
also eligible for sabbatical if they have the approval of the
Dean/Director of the Library to apply. Where the leave is to be used for
upgrading, the University shall give special consideration to
employment equity goals. Faculty Members' service for purposes of
sabbatical leave eligibility shall be calculated from the date of their
initial full-time appointment by the University or from the date of their
last sabbatical leave, whichever is later. When Members take a
sabbatical leave, all accumulated years of eligibility entitlement are
exhausted. Time spent on sabbatical leave, study leave, or leave
without pay does not count towards sabbatical eligibility. Sabbatical
leave will not be automatic and shall be granted following an approved
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 66

application procedure, outlined below.
b) In order to attract qualified faculty, the Vice-President, Academic
may from time to time grant credit towards a sabbatical leave for
full-time faculty service at another University, including service at a
Federated or Affiliated College of a University. Such entitlement will
be specified in the initial letter of appointment.
c) Under special circumstances, the Members may make application
for leave one year prior to the year in which they would normally
become eligible to take sabbatical leave. If sabbatical leave is granted
in this instance, the Members will receive a stipend of 75% of their
salary.
d) In the interests of effective scheduling of a unit's course offerings,
the Dean/Director of the Library may request that Members apply for
their sabbatical leave after the completion of five years. The
Dean/Director of the Library shall make the request by 1 May of the
academic year preceding the year in which the Members are being
requested to apply for sabbatical leave, and the Members shall respond
to the Dean's/Director of the Library's request by 1 June. Should the
Members accept, the Members shall submit a sabbatical plan by 30
September to the academic unit head, as per paragraph 3(b). Should
Members accept, and if the application is approved, the Members shall
receive a stipend of 80% of their salary during the sabbatical leave.
3. Application
a) Each Dean/Director of the Library shall maintain and annually
revise, in consultation with the unit, a sabbatical eligibility plan for
each Unit, the purpose of which is solely to assist in the orderly
planning of sabbatical leaves. The plan will be distributed by 1 July of
each year to each unit.
b) Applications for sabbatical leave shall be submitted by the
Members to their Dean/Director of the Library with a copy to the
academic unit head no later than 30 September of the academic year
preceding.
c) The unit shall prepare a recommendation for or against approval
of the application for sabbatical, including in the recommendation its
assessment of the academic merits of the project and shall forward its
recommendation to the Dean/Director of the Library by October 20.
d) The Dean/Director of the Library shall transmit the
recommendation of the Unit along with the Dean/Director of the
Library's own recommendation to the Vice-President, Academic no
later than November 15 of the academic year preceding that in which
the leave is to be taken. After verifying the status of the application in
relation to criteria defined in clauses 1 and 2 of this Article, and after
taking into consideration the recommendations of the Unit and the
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 67

Dean/Director of the Library, the Vice-President, Academic shall reach
a decision and shall transmit it to the Member no later than 15
December of the academic year preceding that in which the leave is to
be taken.
e) The Vice-President, Academic shall base his/her decision to
approve or not to approve a sabbatical plan on the academic merits of
the sabbatical leave project and its value to the professional
development of the Member and to the University.
f) Should Members wish to make subsequent changes in their
sabbatical plan, they shall submit the proposed changes to their
respective Dean/Director of the Library for prior approval. If the
proposed changes are not approved by the Dean/Director of the Library
after consultation with the unit, Members may ask that they be
submitted to the Vice-President, Academic for approval.
g) The Dean/Director of the Library may refer back the application
submitted by the Member as per paragraph (b) above or the application
for change as per subparagraph (f) above. If referred back, the
applicant shall consider the Dean/Director of the Library’s suggestions
and will re-submit a new application within 10 working days.
4. Postponement
a) In the event that it is necessary on financial and/or program
grounds for the Dean/Director of the Library to require postponement
of a sabbatical leave, the Members shall be informed by 1 July of the
academic year preceding that in which the sabbatical is to be taken.
Such a postponement shall not be required unreasonably. In such a
case, Members shall receive an additional 5 percent of their regular
salary for each year of postponement as "stipend" during their
sabbatical year, to a maximum of 100% of normal salary. A sabbatical
leave cannot be postponed for more than three (3) years on financial or
program grounds.
b) In the event that Members wish to postpone application for leave,
they shall do so only for valid reasons, and permission to do so shall be
sought from the appropriate Dean/Director of the Library and the unit
no later than 1 May immediately preceding the deadline for application
specified in 3b) above. Should Members with a sabbatical leave
confirmed by the Vice-President, Academic wish to postpone the leave,
for valid reasons, permission shall be sought from the appropriate
Dean/Director of the Library and the Unit at least two (2) months prior
to the planned commencement of such leave. If postponement of
application for leave or of approved leave is approved, the Member
does not have right of precedence over colleagues in the unit's
sabbatical leave plan and is not entitled to any additional stipend. In no
case may such a postponement be for more than one (1) year. Should
such Members be required by the Dean on financial and/or program
grounds to postpone their sabbatical leave in the following academic
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 68

year, they shall not be entitled to any additional remuneration.
c) Where Members postpone a sabbatical leave without formal
approval, they lose the right of precedence over colleagues in the unit's
sabbatical leave plan. Should such Members be required by the
Dean/Director of the Library on financial and/or program grounds to
postpone their sabbatical leave in the following academic year, they
shall not be entitled to any additional remuneration.
d) Where Members fail to apply for sabbatical leave for which they
are eligible to apply, they shall not be entitled to any additional
remuneration should they be required to postpone their sabbatical leave
in the following academic year on financial and/or program grounds.
e) If Members' sabbatical proposals are rejected on academic
grounds by the Vice-President, Academic and/or Arbitration Board,
they are entitled to apply the following year, but they are not entitled to
any additional remuneration.
f) Deadlines may be waived by agreement of the parties.
5. Duration
Members may elect a sabbatical leave for a period of:
a) Six (6) months normally commencing either on the first day of
July or the first day of January.
or
b) Twelve (12) months normally commencing on the first day of July
or such other date as agreed to by their respective Dean. Such
agreement shall not be unreasonably withheld.
6. Remuneration
a) A Member taking a six (6) month sabbatical leave, after six years
of accumulated sabbatical credit is entitled to full salary.
b) Members taking a twelve (12) month sabbatical leave are entitled
to a stipend equivalent to 85% of the salary they would normally have
received.
c) Upon the Member's request, the University will provide a portion
of the sabbatical leave stipend as a research grant subject to provincial
and federal regulations. A Member who receives such a research grant
from the University must make the necessary deductions and
declarations as applicable under either the federal or provincial laws.
The University accepts no responsibility in this regard.
d) A Member on sabbatical leave shall not take other paid
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 69

appointments without the prior written permission of the Dean/Director
of the Library. Such permission shall not be unreasonably withheld.
Normally, any additional remuneration received during the leave will
be limited to an amount which brings a Member's total to one hundred
per cent of normal salary, plus travel and related expenses for the
Member's spouse and dependent children. Where total remuneration
exceeds this amount, the University reserves the right to reduce the
sabbatical stipend proportionately.
e) Members who will have accumulated unused sabbatical credit by
the time of their normal retirement date will be entitled to apply for a
sabbatical leave to occur during their penultimate year before
retirement, and on the understanding that they will return to the
University for their final year. Should sabbatical leave be granted in
such circumstances, Members are entitled to a stipend pro-rated on the
basis of the normal sabbatical stipend and shall include entitlement for
the year of return. At their discretion, the Deans/Director of the Library
may agree to pro-rate the period of time taken as sabbatical leave in lieu
of a pro-rated stipend.
7. Benefits
a) During the period of sabbatical leave, the Member shall continue
to receive all fringe benefits as a regular full-time Member of faculty.
b) During a sabbatical leave, pension calculations shall be based on
the Member's salary that would have been in effect if the Member had
not been on sabbatical.
8. Vacation
All Members on sabbatical leave will be assumed to have used their
prior year's annual vacation entitlement during the period July 1 to June 30
of the academic year in which the sabbatical leave is taken. Furthermore,
Members who take a six-month sabbatical leave shall be deemed to have
taken half of their annual vacation entitlement during the actual period of the
sabbatical leave. Members will be entitled to one year's vacation entitlement
after June 30 of the year in which the sabbatical leave is completed.
9. Return
a) Members granted sabbatical leave shall undertake to return to the
University to resume their responsibilities as a full-time Member of
faculty for the period of at least one (1) year. Failure to return to the
University shall require the Member to reimburse the University for all
of the salary and benefits received during the leave, except as such
obligations may be waived by the University.
b) Members must prepare and forward to their Dean/Director of the
Library and unit head, within one week of their return, a full written
account of their scholastic and professional activities and
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 70

accomplishments as per the approved sabbatical plan during the leave.
This report shall become part of their file to be used in evaluating the
Member for salary increments and promotions. Failure of a Member to
submit the sabbatical report by the specified time limit will result in the
delay of the decision whether to award or deny the annual increment as
per Article 4.11 (11).
Members who are not eligible for an annual increment must have their
report submitted within one month of their return in order to begin to
accumulate sabbatical credit without penalty. When Members fail to do
so, sabbatical credit shall not begin to accumulate until January 1 or
July 1, whichever is the closest date next following submission of the
report. If, after reviewing the report, the Dean/Director of the Library
finds the performance to be unsatisfactory, appropriate measures may
be taken, as provided in Article 2.40 and 2.41.
c) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 9a) of this Article,
the University may grant up to a maximum of one (1) year of study
leave to Members immediately following the completion of their
sabbatical leave provided that during this sabbatical leave the Members
were studying to obtain a Doctorate, and the additional year of leave will
allow them to continue the program for the Doctorate. Under
exceptional circumstances, upon recommendation of the Member's
Dean/Director of the Library and with the permission of the Vice-
President, Academic, the study leave may be extended for an additional
year. This back-to-back sabbatical/study leave shall be granted to
Members only once in their academic career. The Members shall
receive a stipend, according to the provisions of Article 3.22 during this
study leave, and must return to the University for a period equal to the
total leave or, in the alternative, reimburse the University for the full
amount of the stipend and fringe benefits received during the period of
combined sabbatical/study leave.
A Member may request an altered pattern for the payment of the
combined sabbatical/study leave stipends provided that the payment in
any one year may not exceed the stipend originally awarded for the
sabbatical year.
10. Disability
In the event that a Member on sabbatical leave becomes unable to fulfil
the sabbatical obligations because of disability the following policies and
procedures shall apply.
a) The Member will advise the Dean/Director of the Library, as soon
as possible under the circumstances, of the disability and will provide
the Dean/Director of the Library with a physician's report outlining the
extent of the disability and if possible the expected date of return. For
the duration of the illness the provisions of Article 3.40 - Physical and
Mental Illness shall apply.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 71

b) In the event that the sabbaticant is disabled from performing
his/her tasks for less than 50% of the sabbatical leave, the Member shall
be deemed to have taken his/her sabbatical leave. The Member shall
submit a report on his/her sabbatical activities on completion of the
sabbatical leave or at the end of the sick leave, whichever occurs later.
The impact of the illness on the sabbatical plan of the Member shall be
taken into consideration at evaluation time.
c) In the event that the Member is disabled from performing his/her
tasks for more than 50% of the sabbatical leave, the Member shall be
deemed not to have taken a sabbatical leave. The Member shall be
eligible to take his/her sabbatical leave at the first mutually acceptable
time. If the member indicates that he/she will carry out the previously
approved sabbatical plan then the Dean/Director of the Library, on the
advice of the unit and in consultation with the Member, will determine
the date on which the sabbatical leave will commence. In the event that
the Member wishes to amend the sabbatical plan, the provisions of
Article 3.21 3 f) shall apply.
11. Three-year Sabbatical
While sabbaticals after six years are the norm, the parties recognise that
outside of the sabbatical eligibility plan, which will take precedence, it may
be mutually beneficial to Members and the University if members were to
take a six-month sabbatical at 85% salary after three years of service. For
each six month of service beyond three years the sabbaticant is eligible for
an additional 2.5% of salary during the leave period. When Members take a
sabbatical leave all accumulated years of eligibility entitlement are
exhausted. Sabbaticals after three years can be granted provided that:
Eligibility
a) Members have tenure when the leave becomes effective.
b) Such a leave does not require the postponement of a sabbatical
leave for a Member with six or more years of service.
c) The leave does not have a negative impact on the budget of the
academic unit.
Return
a) Members granted sabbatical leave under this article shall
undertake to return to the University to resume responsibilities as a
full-time Member of faculty for the period of at least six (6) months.
Failure to return to the University shall require the Member to
reimburse the University for all of the salary and benefits received
during the leave, except as such obligations may be waived by the
University.
b) Members must prepare and forward to their Dean/Director of
the Library and unit head, within one week of their return, a full
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 72

written account of their scholastic and professional activities and
accomplishments as per the approved sabbatical plan during the
leave, as outlined in paragraph 9 b) of this article.
ARTICLE 3.22 - STUDY LEAVES
A leave for the purpose of upgrading academic qualifications, normally
through the attainment of a higher degree or some other equivalent
acceptable to the University and the Unit shall be known as Study Leave.
Such leave must be in the best interests of the University. The maximum
length of leaves to be granted during a Member's academic career shall
normally not exceed two (2) years.
1. Eligibility
A study leave may be granted to all Members having tenure or holding
probationary appointments after two (2) years of full-time service as
Lecturer/General Librarian or above, but no sooner than two (2) years after a
sabbatical leave except as permitted in Article 3.21 (9)(c). Such leave will
not be automatic and shall be granted only upon the approval by the Vice-
President, Academic, subsequent to consultation with the Unit through its
head (Chair/Director) and the appropriate Dean/Director of the Library, upon
an approved application procedure noted below.
2. Application
a) Applications for study leave shall be made by 30 September in
consultation with the academic Unit through its head
(Chairperson/Director) and the appropriate Dean or Director of the
Library to the Vice-President, Academic. In submitting an application
for study leave, the Members shall provide a well-considered plan
indicating the value of the leave to their professional improvement and
to the best interest of the University. In forwarding the application to
the Dean/Director of the Library, the academic unit through its head
shall recommend for or against approval, including in the
recommendation not only an assessment of the project but also a
judgement on how the leave, if granted, will affect the academic
program(s) and the budget of the particular academic unit. In
forwarding the application to the Vice-President, Academic, the
Dean/Director of the Library shall make an assessment of the
application on the same grounds. The Dean/Director of the Library
will, at the Dean/Director of the Library's discretion, make whatever
inquiry they deem desirable, including consideration of the applicant's
demonstrated potential, in order to determine the merit of the
application. Copies of both the Unit's and the Dean/Director of the
Library's recommendations shall be made available to the candidate.
b) Applications for study leave shall be filed with the Vice-President,
Academic no later than 31 October of the academic year preceding that
in which the leave is to be taken. The Vice-President, Academic shall
verify the status of the application in relation to the relevant University
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 73

policies and the financial implications of the leave, and make a
decision, a copy of which shall be sent to the Member. The decision of
the Vice-President, Academic shall be final and binding.
c) In the event that the Vice-President, Academic finds it necessary to
refuse Members their study leave on financial grounds after the leave
had been approved, that Member shall be given priority within the
Member's Unit for a study leave for the following year.
d) Deadlines listed above may be waived in special circumstances.
3. Terms
a) A one year study leave may be granted after two (2) years of
service as Lecturer/General Librarian or above at a stipend of $20,000
or a pro-rated amount if the leave is for a period of less than one (1)
year.
b) A two (2) year study leave may be granted after four (4) years of
service as Lecturer/General Library or above at a stipend of $20,000
per year.
c) A Member may request a temporary reduction in workload to
undertake or complete doctoral studies. Where, in the discretion of the
Vice-President and upon recommendation of the Dean/Director of the
Library satisfactory replacement arrangements can be made, the
workload reduction will be granted with a proportionate reduction in
salary based on the overload stipend.
d) The maximum period of absence is two (2) consecutive years,
normally commencing on 1 July.
e) In the event that Members wish to pursue a summer course for
upgrading purposes, they may request up to four (4) weeks at full pay if
they contribute equal time from their vacation period without losing
any of their study leave entitlement. To apply for such a leave,
Members will follow the procedures set out in Paragraph 2i) of this
Article.
4. Benefits
Benefits of insurance, pension, etc., will continue during the leave
provided the Members continue payment of their portion of the fees.
5. Return
a) The Members must agree in writing to return immediately to the
University for a period equal to their leave of absence but in no case for
a period of less than one (1) year or to reimburse the University for the
full amount of the stipend received. If Members return to the
University for a period of time less than the length of the leave the
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 74

University shall require the Members to reimburse the University for all
or part of their stipend received during the leave.
b) The Members must prepare and forward to their Dean/Director of
the Library and unit head, within one (1) week of their return, a full
written account of their scholastic activities during the study leave. The
report shall become part of their personnel file.
c) Time spent on study leave does not count towards sabbatical
credit.
6. Appointments while on Leave
All Members on study leave must obtain written approval in advance
from the Dean/Director of the Library for any paid activity before making
any such commitment.
ARTICLE 3.31 - VOLUNTARY REDUCED WORKLOAD
1. The Board and the Faculty Association endorse the principle of
voluntary reduced workload as being mutually beneficial to the Members
and the institution. Any full-time Member of the bargaining unit who
currently occupies a regular full-time position and who has a minimum of
two (2) years of continuous full-time service at the University at their request
may be granted up to fifty (50%) temporary reduction in workload with a
proportionate reduction in salary, and annual vacation entitlement, provided
that:
a) The temporary reduction is effective for a twelve- (12) month
period.
b) The request is normally made to the unit and the Dean/Director of
the Library three (3) months in advance.
c) The Dean/Director of the Library approves the request, such
approval not to be unreasonably withheld.
2. Notwithstanding paragraph 1a) above, the University may, upon
request, grant voluntary reduced workloads for periods longer than twelve
(12) months and/or renewals of twelve (12) month reduction periods, subject
to the Dean/Director of the Library's approval as in 1c) above.
3. Faculty Members on Voluntary Reduced Workload have the right to
benefits and to contribute to the benefits plan of the University in accordance
with the provisions of the Collective Agreement for sharing contributions.
a) Sick leave. Members will be covered for periods of sick leave to
the extent of the actual salary paid during that period as per Article 3.40
- Physical and Mental Illness.
b) Long-Term Disability. Members who are planning to take a
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 75

voluntary reduced workload must be provided with specific information
concerning coverage for long-term disability during and after the period
of voluntary reduced workload. Members should not accept voluntary
reduced workload without a full and complete written statement
concerning long-term disability coverage.
c) Pension Plan. Members on voluntary reduced workload may
contribute to the pension plan on the basis of their normal full salary
with appropriate contributions from the employee and employer as
outlined in the Collective Agreement to the extent possible under
Revenue Canada regulations. It is understood that contributions based
on normal salary rather than reduced salary may not be possible under
Revenue Canada regulations for a cumulative total of more than five
years.
d) Life Insurance. Life insurance may be carried based on the
Member's normal salary and normal maximum.
e) Sabbatical Leave. Sabbatical leave entitlements for Members on
voluntary reduced workload will be pro-rated in accordance with the
reduced workload.
4. Members who use this option shall remain Members of the bargaining
unit, notwithstanding the definition of Membership as defined in
Article 1.30.
5. For the application of tenure and promotion policies, periods of reduced
workload shall be pro-rated in accordance with the reduction in workload.
Full-time research and teaching activities at another institution while a
Member is on voluntary reduced workload at Laurentian will be counted for
purposes of the minimum time requirement for promotion.
6. Members on voluntary reduced workload retain both the right and the
obligation to contribute to the Administrative work of the University.
Evaluations of such activity by the Dean/Director of the Library would be
expected to recognise the reduced workload of the Member. As full-time
members of the bargaining unit, Members on voluntary reduced workload
retain the right to participate in academic councils as full voting members
and to receive minutes and other departmental and university documents and
communications if the Member can be present on campus. If Members are
absent from campus, the University is not required to undertake
extraordinary steps to assure the ability of the Member to fully participate.
7. During the period of voluntary reduced workload, Members are
expected to submit annual reports as per Article 2.11 in order to qualify for
progress-through-the-rank increments (Articles 4.10 and 4.11). The
evaluation will take into account the reduced workload. If awarded, the
progress-through-the-rank increment will be added to the base salary of the
Member. The new base salary will be used to determine the actual salary of
the Member in conformity with the percent reduction in workload.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 76

ARTICLE 3.32 - LEAVES OF ABSENCE WITHOUT PAY
1. A Member may be granted a leave of absence without pay under terms
approved by the University. All such terms including arrangements for
benefits shall be set out in written form prior to the leave. All terms shall be
communicated in written form to the Faculty Association for information
prior to the leave. Permission for such leave shall not be unreasonably
denied by the employer.
2. An application for such leave shall normally be submitted in writing to
the Dean/Director of the Library at least six (6) months in advance stating
the purpose of the leave. An application for an extension should be made in
writing to the Dean/Director of the Library at least four (4) months in
advance. These time requirements may be waived in special circumstances.
3. Applications for such leaves shall be recommended by the
Dean/Director of the Library after consultation with the unit. Final approval
rests with the Vice-President, Academic.
4. Leave of absence without pay under this article shall normally not
exceed two (2) years.
5. The Members may elect to discontinue the fringe benefits during the
leave of absence subject to existing policies and regulations. If they elect to
continue those fringe benefits available to the Members, they shall make
suitable arrangements as defined in paragraph 1.
6. Court and Political leaves shall be governed by Article 3.33 and 3.34.
ARTICLE 3.33 - COURT LEAVES
1. Leave of absence with pay shall normally be granted to any Member,
other than a Member on leave of absence without pay, who is required to
serve on a jury or to attend as a witness or an expert in a court of justice or
before any legal or statutory body in Canada with power to compel the
attendance of witnesses before it.
2. The Members shall notify their Dean/Director of the Library in
advance, in writing, and shall provide proof of their attendance, if so
requested.
Members shall attempt to make arrangements to ensure that their duties
are properly carried out during the period of their absence.
3. Leave with pay does not apply to Members serving a sentence or
appearing as a witness on their own behalf.
4. When Members wish time off in order to pursue a civil action in court,
the Members shall apply to the Dean/Director of the Library for leave of
absence without pay. (See Article 3.32).
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 77

5. If Members are required to absent themselves from their duties to
appear in court as a result of legal action taken against them in regard to
matters arising out of the performance of their duties to the University, they
shall not be penalised for such absence. Such an absence shall be governed
by paragraph 2 of this Article.
ARTICLE 3.34 - POLITICAL LEAVES
1. The Board recognises that all Members of the bargaining unit are free
to enter public life and to seek any political office, as a member of the
provincial or federal government, or any full-time political office.
2. If Members of the bargaining unit wish to allow their names to stand
either before a party convention or for actual nomination for an election, the
Members shall notify the Dean/Director of the Library concerned within a
reasonable time so that the Dean/Director of the Library may make whatever
arrangements may be deemed necessary in order to ensure that the resulting
added workload can be properly performed by others from the date of the
issuance of the writ up to and including the date of the election.
3. The Board may grant such a Member leave without pay for a period
from the issuance of the writ up to and including election day. Such leave
shall not be unreasonably withheld.
4. Should the Members not be elected, they shall come back to work
immediately to assume their normal duties.
5. If the Members are elected and:
a) If they are Members with tenure and return immediately upon
ceasing to hold office within six (6) years of their election, all rights,
privileges and rank shall be restored to them upon return and the
Members shall be entitled to a rate of pay including all statutory
increases which were granted to Members of the teaching staff of equal
rank that the Members occupied at the time the leave was granted.
Extensions of the six- (6) year time limit may be made by agreement of
the parties. During the term of any such leave, the Members shall be
entitled to leave without remuneration. Such Members shall not be
entitled to any rights or privileges under this Agreement except in
regards to benefits as governed by Article 3.32 - Leaves of Absence.
Nothing in this article shall be construed as preventing such Members
from being employed on a part-time basis by the University for
lecturing/professional library service or for any task, in which case the
Members shall be remunerated therefore at the normal scale for
part-time Members of the teaching/professional library staff.
b) If they are a Member without tenure, they shall be deemed to have
resigned their position with the University as of the day following their
election.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 78

6. Any Members of the bargaining unit who wish to run for a political
office other than a full-time one are free to do so subject to Article 2.00 -
Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of Academics. Any such Members of the
bargaining unit shall be required to perform all normal duties as set out in
this Agreement.
ARTICLE 3.40 - PHYSICAL AND MENTAL ILLNESS
1. The Members of the bargaining unit are eligible for sick leave up to a
maximum of six (6) months at salary otherwise receivable from the date of
disability due to accident or illness, for each separate disability cause,
excluding maternity which shall be covered by the provisions of Article
3.51. Illness of a duration of more than six (6) months will be dealt with
according to the provisions of the University's Long Term Disability Plan.
As soon as practicable after the start of each disability period, the Dean or
the Director of the Library must be informed by or on behalf of the disabled
about the absence and about its expected duration.
Where the University makes payment to the Member according to the
above mentioned terms or assumes liability therefore, the University is
subrogated to all rights of recovery of the Member to the extent that the
University has made payment to, or on behalf of, or for the benefit of the
Member. The University may bring an action in the name of the Member to
enforce these rights.
2. A physician's report shall be submitted, when requested by the Dean or
the Director of the Library. Such a report, with a copy forwarded to the
Director of Personnel, will be required:
a) For any sick leave period in excess of five (5) consecutive
working days.
b) In the event a Member's sick leave pattern raises substantial doubt
of the claim, even if the individual's sick leave periods are short enough
not to require medical certificates otherwise.
3. In order to have a sick leave benefits period reinstated up to the
maximum, Members of the bargaining unit who have been absent and in
receipt of sick leave benefits must return to work for at least one (1) full
working day in the case of a completely unrelated and different disability
cause, and for thirty (30) calendar days in the case of the same disability
cause.
4. Sick leave benefits for any period of absence following notice of
termination of employment will not be payable without substantiating
medical evidence.
5. Sick leave benefits are not cumulative and are not cashable upon
termination of employment or at any other time.
6. Sick leave benefits will be reduced by the amount of any Worker's
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 79

Compensation benefits or similar disability income benefits which the
Member of the bargaining unit is eligible to receive by reason of accident or
sickness, from a government plan, except Unemployment Insurance.
7. At any time during any sick leave, the Member of the bargaining unit
may be requested by the Dean/Director of the Library or by the
Vice-President, Academic to undergo medical examinations by physicians
appointed by the President and paid by the University, in order to be eligible
to receive sick leave benefits and/or to be able to return to work. All
reasonable expenses incurred, as a result of such medical examination shall
be paid by the University.
8. When invalidity is due to drug addiction or alcoholism, benefits
provided by this Article will be granted only for leaves of absence necessary
for proper treatment under a physician's care or that of specialised personnel.
9. When a Member's behaviour raises substantial doubt as to his/her
physical or mental health, it is the Board's right to require a medical
examination as per Article 2.41, paragraph 3(c). LUFA shall be notified
when such action is taken.
10. Sick leave benefits defined in this Article may not be granted under the
following circumstances:
a) Intentionally self-inflicted injuries or diseases.
b) Pregnancy (however, complications due to pregnancy are covered
by sick leave provisions, upon submission of a medical certificate).
c) While vacation pay is also being received.
d) Wilful participation in riots, wars or violent or uncontrolled
demonstrations or protests.
e) Injuries or diseases sustained while committing a criminal act for
which the Member has been found to be guilty by a duly constituted
court or while serving a prison sentence.
11. Should a Member resign or terminate employment with the University
his/her medical reports shall be transferred to the Member's archival
personnel file, as per Article 2.30 (1).
ARTICLE 3.51 - FAMILY RESPONSIBILITY
1. Maternity
A full-time female Member shall be granted maternity leave subject to
the following conditions:
a) The Member shall be entitled to a paid leave of absence providing
she has completed at least twelve (12) months and eleven (11) weeks of
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 80

continuous service with the University.
b) The duration of the leave shall be for a period of seventeen (17)
consecutive weeks.
c) The leave may commence at any time during the eleven (11)
weeks preceding the expected date of delivery.
d) Any period of absence immediately preceding or following such
maternity leave will be considered leave of absence without pay.
e) The Member shall make written application to the Dean/Director
of the Library two (2) weeks prior to the date she intends to commence
her leave, and at that time will provide the University with a certificate
from a legally qualified medical practitioner stating that the Member is
pregnant and her expected date of delivery. The Member shall give due
regard to the need of the University for early notice of a prolonged
period of leave, and application for maternity leave shall be made as
early as possible in advance of the expected delivery date.
f) The Member shall not return to work prior to the expiration of six
(6) weeks following the actual date of delivery. A shorter period of
time shall only be granted with the approval of a legally qualified
medical practitioner.
g) The Member shall advise in writing her unit head and the
Dean/Director of the Library of her intention to return to work two (2)
weeks prior to the scheduled completion of her leave.
h) If a maternity leave happens to occur during the course of a study,
sabbatical or unpaid leave, the Member shall continue to receive the
stipend that is consistent with the study, sabbatical or unpaid leave
taken.
2. Paternity
On the occasion of the birth of his child, a full-time male Member who
has completed twelve (12) months and eleven (11) weeks of continuous
service at the University shall be entitled to leave with full salary and
benefits of up to five (5) days to be taken at the discretion of the Member
within two weeks of birth. The teaching/professional and service
responsibilities of Members on paternity leave shall normally be assumed by
their colleagues without additional expense to the University.
3. Adoption
A full-time Member who has completed at least twelve (12) months and
eleven (11) weeks of continuous service at the University shall be eligible
for a paid leave of absence for a period of up to eight (8) weeks, subsequent
to the placement of the child in his/her care or in accordance with the
requirements of the Children's Aid Society. Should both parents be
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 81

employees of the University, only one of the two shall be entitled to such
leave. Moreover, should a child be the natural child of one of the two
parents, and is adopted by the spouse of the natural parent, the spouse shall
not be entitled to this leave.
4. Special Needs
A full-time member who has completed at least twelve (12) months
and eleven (11) weeks of continuous service at the University shall be
eligible for a paid leave of absence for a period of up to two (2) weeks to
fulfil responsibilities relating to the special needs of a member of the
employee’s family. Special needs may include, but are not restricted to,
resettlement of aged or disabled parents, serious illness of parents, partner,
or child, medical treatment of partner or child that cannot be provided in
the Sudbury Region. The teaching/professional and service
responsibilities of Members on this leave shall normally be assumed by
their colleagues without additional expense to the University.
ARTICLE 3.52 - COMPASSIONATE LEAVE
1. In the event of the death of a Member of an employee's family, the
employee shall be granted a leave of absence of up to five (5) consecutive
days with pay.
2. The term “member of an employee’s family” means partner (which
includes husband, wife, common-law partner, and same-sex partner), son
and daughter, brother and sister, mother and father, mother-in-law and
father-in-law, sister-in-law and brother-in-law, grandparents, guardians,
grandchildren, daughter-in-law and son-in-law.
3. For a longer period of absence, a Member may apply for leave without
pay according to Article 3.32 - Leave Without Pay.
ARTICLE 3.6 - ABSENCE - GENERAL
The University as a community of scholars requires the availability of its
Members on a regular and on-going basis to ensure that the activities of the
University scheduled and unscheduled can be carried out in an orderly
manner.
1. Any absence shall not normally interfere with assigned and/or
scheduled activities and the harmonious functioning of the unit.
2. Any absence from campus affecting teaching/professional librarian
duties shall be governed by Article 2.00 - Rights, Responsibilities and Duties
of Academics.
3. From Labour Day to Spring Convocation absences of more than one (1)
week require notification to the Chairperson/Director and permission of the
Dean/Director of the Library. Shorter absences require notification to the
Chairperson/Director/ Director of the Library. When scheduled or assigned
duties are affected by an absence, Members shall make suitable
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 82

arrangements through their Chairperson/Director who shall advise the
Dean/Director of the Library when the absence has a significant impact on
the Member's duties.
4. From Spring Convocation to Labour Day, Departments/Schools must
maintain a fair and equitable system to assure a reasonable presence
sufficient to administer the Department/ School, to deal with correspondence
and to maintain on-going availability for student counselling and other
unscheduled issues as they may from time to time arise. Absences during
this period must be in accordance with this system. For any absences of
more than a week, prior written permission shall be obtained from the
Dean/Director of the Library who shall not unreasonably withhold such
permission.
5. Except where Members are on vacation, leave or other approved
absence they must remain in communication with their unit so that it is
reasonably possible for the University to contact and/or recall them on short
notice.
6. It may in exceptional cases, be necessary for the University to recall a
Member who is on vacation, leave or formally approved absence as defined
in Paragraph 5. The University will not do so arbitrarily or unreasonably. In
such cases, the University will bear reasonable transportation costs
consequent upon any such recall.
ARTICLE 3.93 - PHYSICAL AND MENTAL ILLNESS
In the event of illness, a Sessional Instructor shall be granted leave with full
pay up to two (2) weeks in each term. If requested, the Sessional Instructor
shall provide a medical certificate to substantiate the claim. For longer
illnesses no deduction of pay shall be made in cases where no substitute
teaching costs accrue to the Board.
ARTICLE 3.94 - FAMILY RESPONSIBILITY
The Ontario Employment Standards Act provides specific rights and
responsibilities with respect to leaves related to family responsibilities.
These provisions will apply to Sessional Instructors.
ARTICLE 3.95 - POLICY AND PROCEDURES IN THE EVENT OF
DEATH
NOTE: The following procedures and practices are currently in place and
are largely determined by external agencies. It may from time to time be
necessary to make adjustments to these procedures based on requirements of
these external agencies. The Parties agree that such changes required by
external agencies do not require prior approval.
1. The beneficiary is to contact the Pension and Benefits Officer in the
Personnel Office. If within seven (7) days the University has not been
contacted by the beneficiary, the University shall make every reasonable
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 83

effort to contact the beneficiary.
2. Life Insurance
a) The employee is insured for three- (3) times salary to a maximum
of $300,000.
b) The following documents will be required to request payment of
the insurance carrier:
- the beneficiary must complete a Statement required by
the insurance carrier as well as provide his/her Social
Insurance Number;
- the notice of the employee's death that appeared in the
Obituary Notices;
- a Death Certificate;
- the last insurance certificate that was issued to the faculty
member.
c) The Life Insurance proceeds are usually paid within one month.
3. Pension Plan
If the Member dies prior to receiving a pension, the following will be
required to process the benefits:
a) The University shall contact the Beneficiary and outline the
procedures to be followed.
b) The Beneficiary must complete an "Application for Death
Benefit".
c) Provide a Death Certificate.
d) Provide a "notarial copy" of the employee's "Last Will and
Testament".
e) All Members should have a current "Last Will and Testament".
f) Beneficiaries of Members without a "Last Will and Testament"
will have to settle any disputes between "potential Beneficiaries
(children vs spouse)' in the courts, prior to receiving any funds from
the Pension Plan.
The file will be forwarded to the Actuary for the calculation of the
death benefit. Once that calculation is received, the Beneficiary will be
contacted. The Beneficiary can request a lump sum refund or a transfer to
a R.R.S.P. that is not subject to locked-in provisions.
The death benefit from the Pension Plan is usually paid within two to
three months.
If the Member dies after commencing to receive his/her pension, the
form of pension that was selected by the Member will determine if further
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 84

benefits are payable to the Beneficiary.
4. Continuation of Benefits to Spouse and Dependants
The Benefits, Hospital Care, Extended Medical and Dental Insurance shall
be continued to the end of the month following the month in which the
death occurred.
5. It is normal that life insurance claims are processed by the insurance
carrier within three to four weeks from receipt of required documentation. In
the event of delays in processing a claim, the University will use its best
efforts to assist the beneficiary in resolving any difficulties caused by the
delays.
ARTICLE 3.96 - SALARY TO BENEFICIARY IN THE EVENT OF
DEATH OF FACULTY MEMBER
1. Salary Rate: shall be the rate of gross pay for the contract period,
including any proportionate reduction in stipend consequent on approved
University policies.
2. Termination Date: shall be the end of the month in which the death
occurs.
3. Period of Negotiations: where it would unduly retard settlement to
postpone closure until the completion of a Collective Agreement, an
arbitrary figure in excess of any anticipated agreement may be used as the
basis for settlement by mutual agreement of the Parties.
4. Vacation Pay: the lesser of 2% per week or 8% per month of
entitlement shall be calculated on gross earnings paid during the period of
the year to termination.
5. Sabbatical Leave: is an investment by the University in an approved
plan of professional development with a view to enhance future
contributions to the work of the University and the broader scholarly
community. Sabbatical leave entitlement is not a benefit, which the
employee or his/her assigns can claim as of right in the event of either
termination (for any cause), retirement, or death. For purposes of death
benefits (Hospital care, Extended Medical and Dental Insurance), any
sabbatical stipend is to be regarded as the equivalent of salary.
6. Contractual Travel Allowance: may be claimed by the Beneficiary for
vouchered expenses incurred prior to termination.
ARTICLE 4.00 - SALARY STRUCTURE
SALARY STRUCTURE YEAR 2002-2003
1. The salary of each Member shall be composed of the base salary of
each Member as of June 30, 2002 as modified by the following items:
a) A scale increase of 3.2 % of the Member's regular salary.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 85

b) A progress-through-the-rank increment for the evaluation carried
out for the year 2001-2002 as described in Article 4.11. The progress-
through-the-rank increments shall have the following values:
Rank Increment
Instructor $ 1 300
Lecturer / General Librarian $ 1 500
Assistant Professor / Librarian $ 1 650
Associate Professor / Librarian $ 1 950
Full Professor / Librarian $ 2 100 *
* For the rank of Full Professor, where a Member’s salary
exceeds $115,000 per annum the PTR will be at the 50% value
($1 050).
c) Additional qualification increments shall be awarded pursuant to
Article 4.21.
d) Merit increments shall be awarded according to Article 4.20 to 5%
of the full-time Members of each Faculty and the Library.
e) A special catch up increment to be awarded of $ 500 effective
July 1, 2003 and an additional $800 on January 1, 2004 regardless of
rank.
2. The salary structure for 2002-2003 shall be as follows:
Rank Floor
Instructor 30 666
Lecturer / General Librarian 38 152
Assistant Professor / Librarian 47 326
Associate Professor / Librarian 58 867
Full Professor / Librarian 74 119
SALARY STRUCTURE YEAR 2003 - 2004
1. The salary of each Member shall be composed of the base salary of
each Member as of June 30, 2003 as modified by the following items:
a) A scale increase of 3.2 % of the Member's regular salary.
b) A progress-through-the rank increment for the evaluation
carried out for the year 2002-2003 as described in Article 4.11. The
progress-through-the-rank increments shall have the following
values.
Rank Increment
Instructor $ 1 500
Lecturer / General Librarian $ 1 700
Assistant Professor / Librarian $ 1 850
Associate Professor / Librarian $ 2 150
Full Professor / Librarian $ 2 300*
* For the rank of Full Professor, where a Member’s salary
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 86

exceeds $115,000 per annum the PTR will be at the 50% value
($1 150).
c) Additional qualification increments shall be awarded
pursuant to Article 4.21.
d) Merit increments shall be awarded according to Article 4.20 to 5%
of the full-time Members of each Faculty and the Library.
e) A special catch up increment to be awarded of $ 500 effective
July 1, 2003 and an additional $800 on January 1, 2004 regardless of
rank.
2. The salary structure for 2003-2004 shall be as follows:
Rank Floor
Instructor 31 647
Lecturer / General Librarian 39 373
Assistant Professor / Librarian 48 840
Associate Professor / Librarian 60 751
Full Professor / Librarian 76 491
SALARY STRUCTURE YEAR 2004 - 2005
1. The salary of each Member shall be composed of the base salary of
each Member as of June 30, 2004 as modified by the following items:
a) The scale increase will be determined by the Parties by April 1,
2004. Should the Parties fail to reach agreement on the percentage of
the scale increase by April 1, 2004, Mr. Martin Teplitsky, QC shall
be appointed to fix the across the board increase for July 1, 2004. If
Mr. Teplitsky is incapacitated, Mr. Owen Shime shall be appointed,
and if Mr. Shime is unavailable, Mr. William Kaplan shall be
appointed. However, if the parties agree, they may appoint another
person as arbitrator if Mr. Teplitsky is incapacitated.
b) A progress-through-the rank increment for the evaluation
carried out for the year 2003-2004 as described in Article 4.11. The
progress-through-the-rank increments shall have the following
values.
Rank Increment
Instructor $ 1 700
Lecturer / General Librarian $ 1 900
Assistant Professor / Librarian $ 2 050
Associate Professor / Librarian $ 2 350
Full Professor / Librarian $ 2 500*
* For the rank of Full Professor, where a Member’s salary
exceeds $115,000 per annum the PTR will be at the 50% value
($1 250).
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 87

c) Additional qualification increments shall be awarded
pursuant to Article 4.21.
d) Merit increments shall be awarded according to Article 4.20 to 5%
of the full-time Members of each Faculty and the Library.
e) A special catch up increment to be awarded of $ 500 effective
July 1, 2004 and an additional $800 on January 1, 2005 regardless of
rank.
2. The salary structure for 2004-2005 shall be as follows: (to be
determined as in 1.a) above.
Rank Floor
Instructor
Lecturer / General Librarian
Assistant Professor / Librarian
Associate Professor / Librarian
Full Professor / Librarian
ARTICLE 4.10 - PROGRESS-THROUGH-THE-RANK (S)
INCREMENTS
1. The purpose of these increments is to provide, through a series of salary
increases, orderly promotion within rank.
2. These increments shall be awarded annually for satisfactory
performance of duties per Article 4.11.
3. Increments may be withheld if performance is deficient, as outlined in
Article 4.11.
4. Any Members who are promoted to a higher rank shall not be required
to take a loss in salary. If such Members' salaries are below the floor salary
of the higher rank, they shall receive the floor salary upon promotion.
5. When in a particular year Members are promoted to a higher rank the
progress-through-the-rank(s) increment for that year, if awarded by the
Dean/Director of the Library, will be made at the higher rank.
ARTICLE 4.11 - PROCEDURES FOR THE AWARD/DENIAL OF A
PROGRESS-THROUGH-THE-RANKS INCREMENT
1. When a Member's performance is judged to be satisfactory by the
Dean/Director of the Library, the annual increment shall be awarded. The
denial of an annual increment where the Member is eligible shall be viewed
as a disciplinary measure as per Article 2.40.
2. Decisions to award or deny the annual increment shall be
communicated to the Members by June 30th.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 88

3. For those Members on sabbatical or study leave, the decision whether
to award the annual increment may be delayed until submission of their final
report as specified in Article 2.11 - Annual Report for Members.
4. The Dean/Director of the Library shall examine the annual reports as
per Article 2.11, and make such other inquiries, as he/she deems appropriate.
Where the Member does not show active participation and/or satisfactory
performance in all three areas, A, B, and C (for Members in the regular
stream) or both areas A and C (for Members in the alternate stream) under
and within the provisions of Article 2.00, the Dean/Director of the Library
shall undertake a more detailed review of the Member's activities. This
review shall include at least an examination of prior annual reports covering
a period of time determined by the Dean/Director of the Library following
consultation with the Member. The Dean/Director of the Library shall
inform the Member of the results of this review and shall award an annual
increment where overall performance is found to be satisfactory.
5. If, for any reason, the Dean/Director of the Library is sufficiently
concerned about the performance of an individual Member who is eligible
for an annual increment to consider denying the annual increment, he/she
shall direct that an evaluation of that Member be made by the
FPC/FFPC/LPC. The Dean/Director of the Library shall have ultimate
discretion to decide which Members shall be evaluated by the
FPC/FFPC/LPC.
6. The FPC/FFPC/LPC shall submit its evaluation to the Dean/Director of
the Library by June 15th. The FPC/FFPC/LPC shall make such inquiries, as
it deems appropriate. It may examine any aspect of the Member's academic
performance for the proceeding twelve (12) months. The FPC/FFPC/LPC
shall be empowered to make use of such Student Evaluation Instruments as
are agreed to by the parties. Summaries of such evaluations shall be made
available to the Member by the Chairperson of the FPC/FFPC/LPC without
attribution to the students. The evaluation of the FPC/FFPC/LPC must
include a summary statement of the overall adequacy of the Member's
performance, i.e., that such performance is satisfactory or unsatisfactory.
7. The Dean/Director of the Library shall make an independent evaluation
of the Member in question. In the formulation of his/her evaluation the
Dean/Director of the Library may make such inquiries, as he/she deems
appropriate. The evaluation of the Dean/Director of the Library must
include a summary statement of the overall adequacy of the Member's
performance is satisfactory or unsatisfactory.
8. A copy of the evaluation of the FPC/FFPC/LPC and the Dean/Director
of the Library shall be provided promptly to the Member. The said
evaluations shall all become part of the Member's personnel files as per
Article 2.30 - Personnel Files.
9. After making his/her evaluation, the Dean/Director of the Library shall
decide whether to award or deny a normal increment to the Member in
question. The normal increment must be awarded if both evaluations
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 89

indicate that performance is satisfactory. In the above instance, the
Dean/Director of the Library shall not direct a subsequent evaluation of the
Member for a period of two (2) years following, unless there is documented
evidence of unsatisfactory performance in the Member's personnel file.
10. All procedures for the evaluation of academic performance of Members
shall be completed no later than June 30th, except in cases where the
Member elects to appeal or in cases of leave as in Article 2.11. In these
leave cases; the procedures shall be completed by July 30th for leaves
terminating on June 30th or by January 31st for leaves terminating on
December 31st.
11. Failure of a Member to submit the annual report by the specified time
limit will result in the delay of the decision whether to award or deny the
annual increment until such time as the report is submitted. If awarded, the
payment of the appropriate monthly portions of the increment shall be
retroactive to the date of the first of the month following the submission of
the report or July 1st immediately following the due date, whichever is later.
No annual increment will be awarded where the annual or sabbatical report
is submitted after September 30th in the calendar year the report is due.
ARTICLE 4.20 - MERIT INCREMENTS
1. Merit increments are awarded by the Vice-President, Academic and will
become a permanent part of the Member's salary structure.
2. Merit increments shall be awarded each year to at least 5% of the full-
time Members in each Faculty and the Library who are receiving a salary or
stipend from the University.
3. All merit increments have the value of one increment.
4. Merit increments are awarded according to the procedures of
Article 2.23. The FPC/FFPC/LPC will consider applications and/or
nominations for merit increments within the time lines specified for
promotion to ranks other than that of Full Professor and shall forward a
recommendation to the Vice-President, Academic.
5. Each FPC/FFPC/LPC shall consider the award of merit increments in
relation to criteria for promotion to the rank that the Member currently holds.
The Member's performance over a three-year time period or since the award
of the last merit increment, whichever is shorter, must be judged clearly
above the level required for promotion to that rank.
6. All merit increments received previously under the terms of prior
Collective Agreements remain in force.
7. The determination of individuals to receive merit increments pursuant
to paragraph 5 of this Article shall not be subject to grievance.
ARTICLE 4.21 - ADDITIONAL QUALIFICATIONS
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 90

INCREMENTS
1. An additional increment shall be awarded to individuals obtaining a
first doctorate provided that such a degree was not a condition of nomination
to a specific rank and salary as indicated in the letter of appointment. Such
an award will be retroactive to the first day of July immediately preceding
the receipt of the doctorate. The doctorate will be deemed to have been
received when the individual can provide a diploma or a letter from the
university where the doctorate is being obtained indicating that all the
conditions for the doctorate, including the thesis defence and the corrections
to the thesis, have been met. The Member shall apply for an additional
increment through the Dean/Director of the Library and must furnish a copy
of the appropriate document.
ARTICLE 4.30 - OVERLOADS
1. All ranks of full-time faculty who are teaching a course on a paid
overload basis will receive a stipend as shown below for courses beginning
after these dates:
Effective Full course Half course
July 1, 2002 $ 6,829 $ 3,415
July 1, 2003 $ 7,034 $ 3,517
July 1, 2004 $ 7,245 $ 3,623
2. Where scheduled Continuing Education courses may otherwise have to
be cancelled, Members may, if they choose, agree to teach a course for an
amount less than the overload stipend. The Association shall be informed of
any such agreement prior to its settlement.
3. In recognition of agreement by the Parties, that excessive overload
teaching/professional Library service is undesirable (Article 2.10 6b) the
Dean/Director of the Library has the authority to limit the number of
overload courses a Member may teach in any given academic year, or its
equivalent in the Library. In order to fulfil this function, the
Dean/Director of the Library must approve all paid overloads including
distance education courses and on-campus courses administered by the
Centre for Continuing Education. In decisions to limit the number of paid
overloads, the Dean/Director of the Library shall be guided by his/her
assessment of the total workload of the Member, the impact of overload
teaching/professional Library work on the likely career progress of the
member, including the capacity of the Member to undertake scholarly
activity and administrative duties expected of all Members. A decision by
the Dean/Director of the Library to limit paid overloads in any academic
year shall not be grievable.
4. Librarians may be paid full or half overloads according to the schedule
outlined in this Article.
5. All Members who believe they are entitled to an overload stipend shall
apply per Article 2.10 - Academic Workload.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 91

ARTICLE 4.31 - DISTANCE EDUCATION COURSES
1. Normal function
The development and/or supervision of distance or on-line education
courses are an integral part of University functions. Therefore, the
development and/or supervision of a distance or on-line education course
may be part of a Member's normal workload as per Article 2.10 and
according to Senate regulations or may be carried out on an overload basis.
Prior to assigning the supervision of a distance or on-line course to a
Member as part of his/her normal workload, the Dean shall seek
volunteers willing to teach such a course. The Dean shall not assign the
development of a distance or on-line education course to a Member as part
of his/her normal workload without his/her prior consent in writing. The
development and/or supervision of a distance or on-line education course are
governed by the terms and conditions of a contract issued by the Centre for
Continuing Education on behalf of the University.
2. Equivalents
The development of a distance education course shall normally be
equivalent to twice the credit value of the course but may be equivalent to a
lesser amount or up to a maximum of a full workload.
In all instances, a written statement of the equivalency will be provided
in advance by the Dean when the work is part of assigned workload and by
the Director of Continuing Education otherwise.
3. Copyright
Copyright for distance education courses shall be governed by
Article 4.72.
4. Compensation
Where the development of a distance education course is not included
as a part of a Member's normal workload the payment shall be an overload
payment based on the equivalence outlined in Paragraph 2 above. A
Member may also agree to some combination of normal workload
assignment plus paid overload as appropriate.
5. Supervision
Where the supervision of a distance education course is not included
as part of a normal workload, a six credit course shall be paid for on the
basis of $1,000 for 1 to 5 students. For enrolments with more than five
students $175 for the year 2002-2003; $180 for the year 2003-2004 and
$185 for the year 2004-2005 per student to a maximum as per Article
4.30.1 with restrictions as per Article 2.10 paragraph 6. Three credit
courses will be pro-rated.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 92

ARTICLE 4.51 - FRINGE BENEFITS
1. The following fringe benefits are available to Members:
Retirement Plan for the Staff of Laurentian University
Group Life Insurance Plan
Accidental Death and Dismemberment Plan
Dependent Group Plan
Extended Medical Plan
Long-Term Disability Plan
Semi-private hospital coverage
2. The cost of premiums shall be shared by the University and the
Member on the following basis:
a) Semi Private Hospital Coverage University 100%
b) Life Insurance: (includes University 50%
(A.D. & D. and D.G.L.) Member 50%
c) Extended Medical University 100%
d) Dental Care Plan University 50%
Member 50%
e) Long Term Disability Member 100%
f) Retirement Plan University:
5.2% of plan earnings up to
Canada Pension Plan Yearly
Maximum Pensionable
Earnings (YMPE), 7% of plan
earnings in excess of YMPE,
and 1.5% of plan earnings to
the Minimum Guarantee
Fund.
Member:
3.2% of plan earnings
up to the YMPE and 5% of
plan earnings in excess of the
YMPE
3. Any Member on an unpaid leave of absence shall make special
arrangements for benefit coverage as outlined in Article 3.32 - Leaves of
Absence Without Pay.
ARTICLE 4.52 - PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
EXPENDITURES
1. In order to further the objectives of the University, the creation and
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 93

dissemination of knowledge, the activities of each full-time Member shall be
supported by professional expenditures in each contractual year. The amount
of these expenditures shall be limited to $1,550 for the academic year 2002-
2003, $1,600 for the academic year 2003-2004 and $1,650 for the academic
year 2004-2005.
2. Professional development expenditures allowable under this Article
include the following:
a) Membership fees for professional and/or learned societies
related to the Member’s discipline.
b) Subscriptions to professional and/or learned journals.
c) Books, materials, equipment, and services directly related to
research and teaching/professional Library work.
d) Registration fees for the member to attend a scholarly
conference.
e) Travel including transportation, food and accommodation
(subject to University travel policies) for the member to attend
relevant scholarly conferences or seminars, or to visit other
universities or research sites to conduct research and scholarly work
which cannot be done at Laurentian University.
f) Page and reprint charges or costs incurred in the preparation and
completion of scholarly manuscripts.
g) Professional/academic development or upgrading.
h) Hiring part-time assistants in support of research and teaching,
excluding marking.
3. Expenditures must be approved in advance by the Dean/Director of the
Library and reimbursements will be made on verification of receipts. In the
event that expenditures are incurred in relatively small amounts - less than
50% of the total or less than the remaining maximum allowable amount -
reimbursements should be accumulated but receipts must be submitted not
later than January 1 or July 1 following the date the expenditures have been
made.
4. Full-time Members who are on sabbatical leave, study leave, or
voluntary reduced workload are eligible for the professional development
expenditures.
5. Any equipment purchased with funds provided under this Article
remains the property of the University but a Member shall have the right if
he/she so chooses to buy back such equipment at fair market value.
6. Any unused portion of the maximum allowed for professional
development can be carried forward for one year only. Such carry forward
must be approved by the Dean/Director of the Library.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 94

ARTICLE 4.53 - TUITION FEE EXEMPTION AND TUITION
BURSARIES
Tuition Fee Exemption
1. The following shall be eligible for Tuition Fee Exemption.
a) All full-time Members as of the effective date of appointment and
all retired full-time Members.
b) Spouses and dependents of all full-time Members and also retired
full-time Members and of deceased retired Members and of Members
who died while in the full-time employ of the University. Dependants
include wife and husband (including common-law relationships),
children up to the age of 26 years (including natural, step, and adopted
children, wards and other children for whom the member is the primary
care giver).
2. Exemption from tuition fees is subject to the following conditions:
a) A student must remain in good standing as defined by the
Registrar's Office in order to qualify for tuition exemption. In the event
of loss of good standing, the same course(s) or an equivalent one(s)
may be taken at the student's expense in order to reinstate good
standing and eligibility.
b) Students who are eligible for an exemption from tuition fees are
not exempted from the payment of incidental fees.
c) To the extent that a grant is specifically given to defray tuition a
student who receives a grant is not eligible for exemption from tuition
fees.
d) To the extent that tuition is reduced by a Laurentian University
tuition scholarship, the student is not eligible for exemption from tuition
fees. Where the funds are from an outside source this condition does
not apply.
3. Eligibility ceases with the term immediately following the date of
termination of employment of a Member, unless otherwise specified in this
Agreement.
4. The Board reserves the right to modify or rescind this policy depending
on the development of future government policy that has a bearing on this
matter.
Tuition Bursaries
1. Tuition Bursaries for the full value of full-time or part-time credit-
course tuition (excluding incidental fees) shall be awarded to those who meet
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 95

the eligibility criteria and conditions for Tuition Fee Exemptions (above) and
who have achieved a 70% average on admission (for new students) or on the
last academic year in which the student was enrolled (returning students).
2. Students awarded a tuition bursary will not be eligible for the tuition
exemption.
ARTICLE 4.54 - SECOND MORTGAGE LOANS POLICY
The University has a policy of providing assistance to Members to finance
the purchase of a principal residence, or, on occasion, to make major
renovations to one already purchased and to refinance second mortgages.
This loan can normally be granted only once. If such assistance is given, it
is by way of a guarantee of a bank loan of up to $15,000 from the Royal
Bank with which arrangements have been made by the University, subject to
the following procedures and conditions.
1. An application must be completed in writing on a form available from
the Comptroller's office. Part of this form is a family budget statement of
income and expenditures. Loans will be recommended only if applicants
can show ability to meet mortgage costs (including first and second
mortgages as relevant) in addition to other normal expenditures.
2. This application is presented to the Executive Committee of the Board
of Governors for their consideration and approval or rejection.
3. The applicant's equity in the property must be at least 50% of the
second mortgage loan and must be at least 10% of the assessed value of the
property.
4. These loans are not available for the purchase of a building site only.
5. If approved, the bank concerned is informed in writing and the
University subsequently gives its written guarantee.
6. The Member for whom the guarantee is signed is required to register a
second mortgage on the property being purchased in the name of the
University in order to secure the University's interest in the event the
University is required to make payment under the guarantee.
7. The Member is required to pay the costs of drawing, executing,
registering and, later when the loan is repaid, of discharging the executed
mortgage.
8. The total outstanding loans at any time guaranteed under this resolution
may not exceed an amount determined from time to time by the Board of
Governors.
9. The Executive Committee shall report from time to time to the Board
on all action taken by the Executive Committee pursuant to this Resolution.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 96

10. As long as the present arrangement with the Royal Bank is in effect,
these loans are available at prime bank interest rate if the loan is repaid in
five years or at prime rate plus one-half percent if the loan is repaid in ten
years or less. The loans can be repaid in equal instalments or in graded
payments, which are lower for the first four years and higher during the last
six years of the loan.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 97

ARTICLE 4.55 - MOVING EXPENSES
1. On initial appointment to the University each regular full-time Member
shall be entitled to reimbursement for moving expenses subject to the
following conditions:
a) All claims must be substantiated by official receipts or reasonable
facsimiles.
b) The University shall reimburse claims at the rate of 100% to a
maximum of $2,500. In exceptional circumstances, the University may
exceed this amount.
Such conditions will be specified in the initial letter of appointment.
2. Moving expenses include:
a) Moving, packing, crating and unpacking of household goods and
personal effects.
b) Transfer of family by the most economical means of
transportation.
c) Reasonable living expenses for the duration of the trip to the new
location.
d) One (1) advance visit for the purpose of securing suitable
housing. The newly appointed Members may be accompanied by their
spouse in this instance.
3. Employees appointed on a contract of twelve- (12) month’s duration or
less shall not normally be eligible to claim moving expenses. The Vice-
President, Academic may under special circumstances, allow some amount
of moving expenses to be reimbursed for such employees.
4. Moving expenses paid to a new Member will constitute a loan made by
the University. This loan will be retired when the Member has completed
three (3) years of continuous service to the University, each year being
equivalent to one-third (1/3) of the reimbursement of the loan.
5. Should the beneficiary of such a loan leave the University before
completing three (3) years of continuous service, for personal or disciplinary
reasons, they must reimburse the University for the remaining unretired
portion of the loan.
ARTICLE 4.56 - PHYSICAL EDUCATION FACILITIES
As of the effective date of appointment, all full-time Members, their spouses
and dependants as defined in Article 4.53 - shall be eligible for free Physical
Education Centre membership subject to the payment of an annual service
fee and lockerette rental fee as established by the Division of Physical
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 98

Education.
ARTICLE 4.57 - PUBLIC LIABILITY INSURANCE
Subject to the express provisions of the current policy (ies) of insurance
providing such coverage, the University shall continue to maintain the
present public liability insurance insuring, among others, Members who are
acting within the scope of their employment, against liability claims,
(including negligence, property damage, personal injury, libel and slander)
up to a limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000). Any changes in this current
policy shall be made with the agreement of the parties.
ARTICLE 4.6 - PARKING
The parties agree that Members wishing to reserve a parking space in any
parking area on campus shall pay the fee established by the University. The
parking fees shall be determined following consultation with the Parking
Committee on which the Association shall maintain its current representation
of one Member.
ARTICLE 4.71 - PATENTS
1. The Board agrees that the Members have the unqualified right to
publish their inventions. The Board further agrees that the Members have no
obligation to modify their research to enhance patentability nor, unless
otherwise agreed, any obligation to seek patent protection for the results of
their scientific work.
2. The Board waives, disclaims and abandons any interest in or claims to
any invention, improvement, design or development made by a Member or
Members except where this has occurred with the use of the Employer's
funds, personnel or equipment in which instance the conditions set out in
Paragraph 4 hereof shall apply. Unless otherwise provided in this Article,
any invention or any patent arising therefrom shall be the sole property of
the inventor.
3. The Members shall have the right to make their own arrangements at
their own expense to patent an invention subject to the obligations in this
Article and shall be entitled to all the proceeds therefrom except where the
invention was made with the use of the Employer's funds, personnel or
equipment.
4. Where an invention, improvement, design or development was made by
Members with the use of the Employer's funds, personnel or equipment the
Members shall sign an Agreement with the University before an application
for patent is filed by them. This Agreement shall provide that the Employer
shall assign all rights, title and interest in the invention, improvement, design
or development to the Members, subject to the University and the Members
sharing equally in the "net proceeds" as used in this Article shall mean the
net profits derived from licensing or commercialisation of the patented
product, equipment or process after deduction of all expenses incurred in
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 99

patent searches, for obtained patent protection and for maintaining said
protection in Canada and in other countries.
5. Members agree to disclose the existence of any patent applications to
the Employer within three (3) months of the date of the application unless
otherwise provided for in this Article and shall affirm in writing at that time
whether or not the discovery has been made and developed with the use of
Employer's funds, personnel or equipment. The Employer may within one
(1) month of receipt of the statement of the Member challenge in writing the
assertion of the Member in regard to the circumstances of the discovery, in
which case the matter shall be settled by arbitration as detailed in Article 8.3.
Any challenge by the Employer shall be null and void unless received
within the above noted time limit. If the Member(s) fails to disclose the
existence of patent applications within three (3) months, it shall be
understood that the Employer maintains its rights under this Article until
such disclosure is made. Failure by the Employer to challenge the assertion
of the Member within one (1) month shall constitute a waiver of any rights
that the Employer may have had in such discovery.
6. For the purpose of interpreting Sections 2, 3, 4, and 5 of this Article,
payment of regular salary and fringe benefits shall not be construed as use of
the Employer's funds.
7. Members shall grant to the Employer a non-exclusive royalty-free,
irrevocable, indivisible, and non-transferable right to use solely for the
University's internal use any patented device, equipment or process when
such device, equipment or process has been invented with the use of the
Employer's equipment, funds or support/technical personnel. Such right
however, shall not include the right to transfer or exploit any product or
process.
8. Where Members decide that they will not patent, produce or market an
invention, improvement or discovery at their own expense but consent to the
University patenting, producing or marketing the invention, before an
application for patent is filed by the University, the University shall negotiate
an agreement with the Members. The agreement shall provide that the
Members shall assign all their rights, titles and interests in the invention,
improvement or discovery to the University subject to the University and the
Members sharing equally in the "net proceeds" derived therefrom.
9. Without mutual agreement, the name of the University shall not be used
in connection with inventions in which the Employer has no interest.
10. Any revenue that the Employer may receive from inventions shall be
dedicated to academic development and research with at least fifty (50)
percent of such income designated for academic development and research
in the Faculty/Library with which the inventor is affiliated. These funds
shall be maintained in a special account, which shall be open to the
inspection of the President of the Faculty Association or the President of the
Faculty Association's designate.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 100

11. The Employer agrees that it shall not enter any agreement to
sub-contract work or responsibilities already undertaken or possessed by the
Employer and the Members without securing to the Members who may be
seconded to or be employed by the sub-contractor all the rights, privileges
and benefits accorded to them in this patent Article of this Agreement. Nor
shall the Employer enter into any agreement to create a consortia of
universities or government departments or private companies for the
purposes of research or development or commercial exploitation without
securing to the Members who may be seconded to or employed by such
consortia, departments or private companies all the rights, privileges and
benefits accorded by this Article. If the Employer makes an agreement
contrary to this provision and fails to secure the said rights, privileges and
benefits to said Members, the agreement shall not apply to Members unless
there is a special agreement in writing between the Employer and the Faculty
Association to waive this clause of the Article.
ARTICLE 4.72 - COPYRIGHT
Copyright vested in the Member:
1. The Member who is the creator of any work including any printed
material, computer programmes, on-line course material, painting, sculpture,
film, slide, tape or similar material shall retain the copyright therein unless
otherwise stated in this Article.
Copyright vested in the University:
2. The parties agree that the University shall hold copyright to any work
including any creative work, printed material, computer programme, on-line
course material, films, slides, tapes or similar materials produced by
Members as part of their normal workload for the University for use in its
distance education courses. In all cases, the University shall arrange for the
development of these courses through a special contract with the Members,
which sets out terms in accordance with the terms in this Agreement. Copies
of all works subject to the policy stated in this paragraph shall contain a
statement or marking identifying the ownership of copyright, and with
appropriate credit, the contributors. A copy of the contract between the
Member and the University shall be sent to the Association.
3. If the University requests a work including a creative work, printed
material, films, slides, tapes, computer programmes, on-line course material,
or similar materials from a Member under special contract, then, in the
absence of any agreement to the contrary, the University shall be the first
owner of the copyright therein. This includes all materials for distance
education courses. A Member entering into such a contract with the
University shall be notified of the terms of this paragraph prior to signing the
contract. The Association shall receive a copy of such notification.
4. All special contracts for distance education courses shall contain a
clause which allows the contributors to use (for their own classroom
purposes) parts of any course that they have created provided that they shall
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 101

not use such material in another distance education course without the
written permission of the University during the period in which the
University holds copyright to that material.
5. The master copy of any work whose copyright is vested in the
University under the terms of this Article shall be the property of the
University. The University shall be responsible for the custody and control
of such works and of any copies thereof.
6. Where consent, fees or licenses are required for the use of incorporated
materials in works in which the University has copyright under the terms of
this Article, the contributor shall notify the University by provision of a list
of works which require such clearance. The University shall have the right
to refuse to accept requests for copyright clearance, which are judged to be
prohibitively expensive.
7. The Members who are the authors of any work, whose copyright is
vested in the University shall sign a warranty that the work is original and
that, to the best of their knowledge, it does not violate any existing
copyright.
8. The offering of courses to which the University has copyright under the
terms of this Article shall be at the University's discretion.
Revision:
9. From time to time, the University may require revisions in works to
which it holds the copyright in order to ensure that proper and current
academic standards are met.
10. Further, the author of work as defined in Paragraph 2 or 3 above may, at
any time after three (3) years of use, and at three (3) year intervals thereafter
notify the University of the need to revise such a work. The University and
the Member shall negotiate the amount it will pay to defray the costs of such
revisions including the Member's fee.
11. The process of revision shall be regarded as the joint responsibility of
the author of the work and the University. If the author chooses not to
undertake the revision or if the author has not accepted the University's
request for revision within one (1) month of receipt of that request or if the
author is no longer an employee of the University, then the academic unit
shall choose an individual to make the required revisions. By so doing, the
author shall not lose contractual rights to any fees. Where the author is no
longer an employee of the University, notice of the intention to revise and of
the proposed revisions shall be sent to him/her by registered mail at the last
known address. In the event that the author and the University cannot agree
on the nature or extent of the revisions, the University may engage the
services of someone approved by the academic unit to make the revisions.
12. The University shall negotiate a fee for any revisions that are made at
the University's request.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 102

13. In all cases where someone other than the authors make revisions to the
work, if the authors object to the extent or the propriety of the revisions, they
may have their names withdrawn as contributors to the work and any visible
indication that they are contributors to the work shall be withdrawn. The
authors must notify the University of their desire to do so within one (1)
month after receiving notice by registered mail of the proposed revisions.
Third party use
14. "Net proceeds" of any fees or royalties that the University receives for
the use by another party of a work to which the University has copyright
under the terms of this Article shall be distributed in accordance with
Paragraph 15 hereof and the Member shall receive no additional payment.
"Net Proceeds" shall mean the fees and royalties received less the cost of
reproduction, administration and distribution.
15. Net proceeds shall be distributed as follows:
a) Until the original production costs have been recouped by the
University, 75% to the University and 25% to the author.
b) After recovery of the original production costs, 50% to the
University and 50% to the author.
"Original production costs" include the normal tariff charges to produce
the physical work including licensing costs of other copyright material
exploited in the work. An accounting of production costs shall be produced
by the University if requested by the Member or by the Association.
Member's Copy:
16. If practicable the Members shall receive, upon request, a copy at a cost
not exceeding the cost of the tape/film/recording or other medium upon
which the work has been produced of any work produced by them for the
University and to which the University holds copyright under the terms of
this Agreement.
17. Should the University wish to erase or otherwise destroy part or all of a
work to which it has copyright under the terms of this Agreement, the
authors shall be given notice of such intention and shall have one (1) month
in which to make known their wish to receive a copy of the section (s) to be
erased. If the authors express such a wish within the time limit, they shall
receive a copy of those sections at a cost not exceeding the cost of the
tape/film/recording or other medium upon which the work has been
produced plus reasonable administrative costs arising therefrom.
ARTICLE 4.73 - COMMITTEE ON PATENTS AND COPYRIGHT
1. The parties agree to create a continuing Committee on Patents and
Copyright, which shall be composed of two (2) individuals appointed by the
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 103

Board and two (2) Members appointed by the Association, with the
Chairpersonship alternating between the Board's representatives and the
Association's representatives at each successive meeting.
2. The Committee shall meet at least twice annually to:
a) Conduct such business as is referred to it.
b) Consider strategies for marketing inventions, improvements or
discoveries.
c) Recommend to the Joint Committee on the Administration of the
Agreement any proposals for modifications or changes in the patents
and copyright articles of this Collective Agreement.
d) Mediate any disputes arising out of Articles 4.71 and 4.72 in
accordance with Paragraph 3 below.
3. Grievance and Arbitration
For the purposes of this Agreement, any grievance by a Member
pertaining to Articles 4.71 and/or 4.72 shall be handled in accordance with
the following procedure:
a) The Member, within three (3) weeks of the event giving rise to the
grievance or the date on which the Member knew or reasonably should
have known of such event if that date is later, shall present a grievance
to the Vice-President, Academic.
b) Within two (2) weeks of receipt of the grievance, the
Vice-President, Academic shall refer the matter to the continuing
Committee on Patents and Copyright and inform the Association of
such grievance. If the Vice-President, Academic fails to refer the matter
to the continuing Committee on Patents and Copyright within the time
limits, the Members shall be deemed to have succeeded in their
grievance and the results thereof shall be binding on the university.
c) The continuing Committee on Patents and Copyright, within one
(1) month of the receipt of the grievance, shall make a recommendation
for the resolution of the grievance. The time limits may be extended by
mutual agreement. If the committee fails to make a recommendation
within the time limits, the Vice-President, Academic may act as in d)
below.
d) The Vice-President, Academic within one (1) week of the receipt
of the recommendations of the continuing Committee on Patents and
Copyright or within one (1) week of the end of the time limits for
action by the Committee shall render the Committee's proposal in the
matter and communicate it in writing to the parties concerned.
e) If the proposal of the Vice-President, Academic rendered pursuant
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 104

to Paragraph 3d) above does not resolve the grievance, the matter may
be submitted to binding arbitration by one (1) arbitrator in accordance
with the grievance and arbitration procedures of this Collective
Agreement.
ARTICLE 4.90 - RATES OF PAY FOR SESSIONAL INTRUCTORS
1. Sessional Instructors shall be paid as follows for each three (3) credit
course which commences after the date shown below; other courses will
be pro-rated as per their credit weighting.
July 1 July 1 July 1
Sessional Members 2002 2003 2004
Without Establishment 4,017 4,138 4,262
With Establishment Status 4,182 4,307 4,436
Retired Sessional Members 4,511 4,646 4,785
These sessional rates of pay include the statutory vacation entitlement
of 4% and payment in lieu of benefits.
Sessional Members are also entitled to the assignment of teaching
assistants and/or markers at a level consistent with assignment of such
assistance to full-time Members.
2. When scheduled Continuing Education Courses may otherwise have to
be cancelled, Members may, if they choose, agree to teach a course for an
amount less than the overload stipend. This amount shall be equal to at least
the stipend for the course divided by twelve (12) and multiplied by the
number of students enrolled in the course at the time the course starts. A
copy of the Agreement shall be sent to LUFA at the same time as it is offered
to the Member.
3. The Parties agree that Sessional Members who have establishment for
one course, according to Article 2.94 11B, shall be paid at the establishment
rate for any other course they may teach. However, such pay does not
confer establishment for that particular course.
4. The Parties agree that compensation for Sessional Members teaching a
three credit course in "didactique" in the School of Education be pro-rated at
$500 per student up to a maximum of the Sessional stipend for such a
course.
5. The Parties agree that the rates of pay for Sessional Members teaching
activity courses in the School of Human Movement shall remain frozen for
the duration of this Collective Agreement at $2,588 for Members without
establishment and $2,700 for Members with Establishment.
ARTICLE 4.92 - PHYSICAL EDUCATION FACILITIES FOR
SESSIONAL INSTRUCTORS
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 105

Sessional Members and their families are eligible for free Physical
Education Centre membership subject to the payment of the annual service
fee and lockerette rental fee as established by the Division of Physical
Education.
ARTICLE 4.93 - EXEMPTION FROM TUITION FEES FOR
SESSIONAL INSTRUCTORS
Sessional Instructors shall be entitled to exemption from tuition fees for
credit courses taken at Laurentian University. The exemption available shall
equal the number of credits taught by the Sessional Member. It can be
accumulated over a maximum of five years.
ARTICLE 4.94 - PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
EXPENDITURES FOR SESSIONAL INSTRUCTORS
In order to further the objectives of the University, the creation and
dissemination of knowledge, the activities of each Sessional Instructor shall
be supported by professional expenditures. Sessional Instructors shall
receive $50 for professional development expenditures (in accordance with
Article 4.52) for each 3-credit course taught to a maximum of $300 per year.
ARTICLE 5.0 - SELECTION OF CHAIRPERSONS/DIRECTORS
1. The Chairperson/Director of a unit shall be appointed by the Vice-
President, Academic in accordance with the procedures of this article.
2. The following procedures will begin at least six months before the end
of a term of a Chairperson/Director or immediately if a post of
Chairperson/Director becomes vacant.
3. a) There shall be a selection committee with the following
composition:
(i) One third of the full-time teaching/librarian Members of the
unit to the nearest whole number. The Members of the committee
shall be tenured or probationary appointments, if possible, and
shall be elected by all the full-time teaching/librarian Members of
the unit.
(ii) The Dean/Director of the Library as a non-voting member.
(iii) The Chairperson/Director of another unit appointed by the
Dean/Director of the Library in consultation with the unit seeking
a Chairperson/Director.
(iv) At least one member of the committee shall be a woman.
Where the unit has no women members and no woman is
otherwise on the committee, the Dean/Director of the Library, in
consultation with the unit shall appoint a woman Member in
addition to those described above.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 106

b) The Committee shall elect a Chairperson from amongst its
Members.
4. The Chairperson of the Selection Committee shall use all reasonable
efforts to invite all full-time Members of the unit (including those on leave)
to submit to him/her, within a specified period of time, in confidence, the
names of possible candidates and reasons supporting their candidature.
Without disclosing the names of the individuals submitting them, these
names and reasons shall be communicated to the Selection Committee.
5. In the event that no candidates are submitted by the unit within ten (10)
working days of the Selection Committee's request, the Committee may
suggest a short list of its own or make a request to the Vice-President,
Academic to search for an outside candidate. In the latter instance, the unit
shall be consulted for the names of possible outside candidates.
6. a) The Selection Committee, after undertaking any further inquiries
that it deems appropriate and relevant shall establish a short list of not
fewer than two (2) and not more than three (3) candidates, unless it is
convinced that it can find only one suitable candidate.
b) The selection committee shall evaluate candidates on the grounds
of proven administrative ability, scholarly activity, and
teaching/librarian competence. The Selection Committee will be
guided by Article 5.3 in making this evaluation. The Committee may
wish to meet with the candidates.
c) Prior to the compilation of its final short list, the Selection
Committee will obtain, in writing, the consent of the candidates on that
list.
d) The unit may wish to meet with the short-listed candidates prior to
the balloting process.
7. Within ten (10) working days from the final receipt of names from the
unit as per paragraph 4, the Chairperson of the Selection Committee shall
make all reasonable efforts to provide all full-time Members of the unit,
including those on leave, with a ballot. The ballot shall set out the short list
of candidates. The Members shall indicate their one preferred choice, in
confidence, to the Chairperson of the Selection Committee within fifteen
(15) working days from the distribution date noted on the ballot. The ballots
shall be opened and counted in the presence of the Selection Committee.
8. In the event the Selection Committee finds only one suitable candidate,
the Chairperson of the Selection Committee shall use all reasonable efforts to
submit to all the full-time Members of the unit, including those on leave, a
ballot showing this candidate's name. Time limits for this submission and
the Member's responses shall be as set out in paragraph 7. The ballots shall
be opened and counted in the presence of the Selection Committee.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 107

9. The Chairperson of the Selection Committee shall report the results of
the selection process and its recommendation to the Dean/Director of the
Library.
10. If the Dean/Director of the Library is prepared to accept the Selection
Committee's recommendation then the Dean/Director of the Library will
forward this recommendation together with his/her own to the Vice-
President, Academic who will make the appointment.
11. Should the Dean/Director of the Library not be prepared to accept the
Selection Committee's recommendation, the Dean/Director of the Library
shall indicate his/her reservations to the Selection Committee and the unit. If
the Dean/Director of the Library and the Selection Committee are unable to
agree on an appointment, the selection procedure shall be reinstituted as in
paragraph 3.
12. The Chairperson/Director shall be a tenured or probationary Member of
faculty. Any outside appointment shall be made in accordance with
Article 2.21 - Appointment and Renewal.
13. In exceptional circumstances the Vice-President, Academic and the
Dean/Director of the Library, after consultation with a unit, may appoint an
acting Chairperson/Director for a period of up to four (4) months, consistent
with Articles 5.1 and 5.2 - Terms of Office and Removal from Office.
14. Abbreviated Selection Process
In many selection processes, it is apparent at step 4 that a strong
consensus has emerged for the selection of one candidate. In that event, the
Selection Committee may proceed directly to step 8 of the procedure. If at
least two Members object to the abbreviated selection process, then the
Committee shall follow the full procedure.
ARTICLE 5.1 - TERM OF OFFICE
1. The term of office for Chairpersons/Directors shall normally be for
three (3) years, renewable by unit selection per Article 5.0.
2. Should Chairpersons/Directors not be able to carry out their duties for
four (4) months or less, the Chairpersons/Directors shall make provision for
the take-over of their duties in consultation with the unit and Dean/Director
of the Library.
3. If the absence is for a period of longer than four (4) months, the
Chairpersons/Directors shall relinquish their title and a new
Chairperson/Director shall be selected according to the procedures set out in
Article 5.0 - Selection of Chairperson /Directors.
ARTICLE 5.2 - REMOVAL FROM OFFICE
1. Proceedings for the removal of the Chairperson/Director may be
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 108

initiated by:
a) A written complaint to the Dean/Director of the Library specifying
the reasons for the complaint, signed by at least a majority of the
full-time faculty of the unit, excluding those on leave and the
Chairpersons/Directors themselves. The Deans/Director of the Library
shall investigate the situation and offer their services to resolve the
matter. If the attempt is unsuccessful, the Deans/Director of the Library
will forward the written complaint together with their report to the
Vice-President, Academic.
or
b) A written complaint by the Dean/Director of the Library to the
Vice-President, Academic specifying the grounds for the complaint.
The grounds for such complaints should normally be related to Articles
5.3 and 2.00.
2. The Vice-President, Academic shall invite the Chairpersons/ Directors
and the unit to discuss the complaint. Following an adequate investigation,
the Vice-President, Academic may request the Chairpersons/Directors to
relinquish their office. If the Chairpersons/Directors are not requested to
relinquish their office the unit or the Dean/Director of the Library may
request initiation of procedures under 3c).
3. If the Chairperson/Director does not voluntarily resign as
Chairperson/Director:
a) The Vice-President, Academic is empowered to suspend that
individual as Chairperson/Director. Once suspended, the Member
retains all other rights and responsibilities as defined in this Agreement.
b) The Vice-President, Academic shall instruct the Dean/Director of
the Library to appoint an Acting- Chairperson/Director in consultation
with the unit in accordance with Article 5.0 - Selection of
Chairperson/Directors and shall forward the complaint to the President
in the form of an appeal.
c) The President shall create an ad hoc committee to investigate the
complaint and shall conduct its investigation in accordance with
statutory requirements. As a result of the committee's investigation, the
President shall rule on the question of removal from office.
d) The decision of the President shall be final, non-grievable and
binding on all parties.
ARTICLE 5.3 - DUTIES OF CHAIRPERSONS/DIRECTORS
1. The Chairpersons/Directors are responsible for providing academic
leadership to their Academic Units. They serve as the principal
administrative officers, as well as the official spokesperson of their academic
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 109

units and they report to the Dean/Director of the Library.
2. Their duties are the following and shall be carried out in accordance
with good administrative practices:
a) To ensure, to the degree possible with such authority as the
Dean/Director of the Library may delegate, that the Members of the
unit are informed of, and fulfil, their duties and responsibilities in
accordance with Senate regulations, the regulations of the University
and this Agreement and to inform the Dean/Director of the Library, in
writing, of any infractions thereof.
b) To convene and preside over meetings of the Academic Unit at
regular intervals during the academic year and to be an ex officio and
voting Member of its standing committees.
c) To ensure as far as reasonably possible that the Members of the
unit have an opportunity to share in the decision-making process, in the
formulation of policies, and in the administrative tasks of the unit.
d) To review and act on all matters involving staff, both faculty and
other, with the appropriate internal body and in accordance with Article
2.11 of this agreement and in accordance with the terms of Collective
Agreements applying to other University bargaining units.
e) To be responsible for presenting the academic programs of the
department or school for accreditation or approval of external bodies, as
needed.
f) To prepare budgetary recommendations and administer the annual
budget for the Academic Unit in conjunction with the Dean/Director of
the Library and the appropriate internal body.
g) To advise the Dean/Director of the Library on the instructional
roster and time-table/desk time for the Academic Unit following
consultation with Members of the Academic Unit and other appropriate
University bodies and officers including the Office of the Registrar and
the Centre for Continuing Education and to supervise the
implementation of the timetable and roster/desk time.
h) To supervise student counselling on academic matters and the
assignment of programs of study within the Academic Unit.
i) To prepare an annual report, due by 1 June, on the
teaching/professional library, scholarly and community activities of the
Academic Unit for submission to the Dean/Director of the Library who
will be responsible by 1 September for preparing a summary report of
his/her faculty for distribution including on the WWW (World Wide
Web). Academic Units' reports will be submitted to the Dean/Director
of the Library after they have been distributed to Members of the Unit.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 110

j) To supervise the use and proper maintenance of space and
equipment allocated to the Academic Unit.
k) To maintain relations between the Academic Unit and external
professional constituencies and agencies and the wider community, as
relevant and appropriate; and to arrange representation as necessary.
And other continuing duties as specified by the Agreement and other
individual duties as may be reasonably assigned from time to time by the
Board.
ARTICLE 5.4 - STIPENDS FOR CHAIRPERSONS/DIRECTORS
1. a) The Chairperson/Director will be entitled to a reduction of
one-third teaching load during each calendar year served as
Chairperson/Director. Where the Dean has assigned a full teaching
load, with the agreement of the Member and the unit, an overload
payment will be made, in lieu thereof. Where the Director of the
Library has assigned a greater than normal workload, with the
agreement of the Member and the unit, an overload payment (or
proportion thereof) will be made.
b) The Chairperson/Director may voluntarily waive these
entitlements, in full or in part.
2. The Chairperson/Director will be entitled to an annual stipend for each
full-year served. Portions of a year will be pro-rated. An acting
Chairperson/Director shall receive a pro-rated stipend in lieu of the
Chairperson/Director for each full month served in excess of the first month.
The stipend shall be based on the number of full-time teaching/librarian
Members in the unit and the number of other full-time employees
(secretaries, technical staff etc.) that report to the Chairperson/Director.
For purposes of administration of this Article the
Chairpersons/Directors shall indicate to the Dean/Director of the Library as
of September 1 of each year the category under which they should be
compensated. Changes occurring after September 1 shall be reflected in the
following year. If the Dean/Director of the Library agrees with the category
under which a Chairperson/Director is to be compensated, the Dean/Director
of the Library will forward this information to the Vice-President, Academic.
If the Dean/Director of the Library does not agree with the category and the
disagreement cannot be resolved, the Vice-President, Academic will rule on
the matter. The ruling of the Vice-President, Academic shall not be
grievable.
Full-time teaching/librarian Members Compensation
and other full-time employees: per year:
1 - 7 $ 750
8 - 13 $ 1,500
14 - 19 $ 2,250
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 111

20 - and over $ 3,000
3. In lieu of compensation, the Chairperson/Director may elect to receive
the whole or part of the stipend in the form of an equivalent enhancement to
the professional allowance. The Chairperson/Director will indicate his/her
intentions in this matter by September 1 of each year.
ARTICLE 6.0 - SENIOR ACADEMIC ADMINISTRATORS
1. Selection
While retaining the right to appoint Senior Academic Administrators,
including the President, the Board recognises the usefulness and desirability
of consultation with Members, Units and Divisions in their selection, and
shall follow the selection and appointment procedures that have been
approved by the Board and the Senate. In instances where an outside
candidate is being considered for a senior academic appointment, the
candidate will normally be offered an appointment according to their
qualifications at a rank consistent with the criteria listed under Article 2.21 -
Appointments and Renewal.
2. Removal
The Board shall consider all serious complaints against senior
Academic Administrators and take appropriate action, including the
possibility of removal from office. It is understood that if a majority of
Members of the bargaining unit within the Administrator's purview indicate
dissatisfaction with that Administrator, the University will view this as one
example of a serious complaint.
3. Re-entry into the Bargaining Unit
a) Any senior Academic Administrators, who are excluded from the
bargaining unit by virtue of their office, shall upon
resignation/retirement/removal from that office return to take-up
Membership in the bargaining unit.
b) No Member shall be displaced from the unit by the entry or
re-entry of former senior Academic Administrators. If there is no
vacancy in the Department/School/Library concerned, the additional
allocation shall not be at the expense of another
Department/School/Library allocation.
c) For all purposes relating to this Agreement, membership in the
bargaining unit of a Senior Academic Administrator shall be reckoned
as if they had not been outside the bargaining unit during their term of
office.
d) Senior Academic Administrators returning to the bargaining unit
shall be considered as Members teaching for the first time (as per
Article 2.10 – Academic Workload, Section 8. 3) and shall be
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 112

assigned teaching/professional library loads in keeping with the
practice of their respective unit(s).
4. Acting or Substitute Senior Academic Administrators
a) The University may from time to time appoint Members of the
bargaining unit to act or substitute for short periods of time in the place
of Senior Academic Administrators.
Members so serving shall not undertake or be required to
undertake any personnel action.
b) For longer periods, i.e. two months or more, when there is a need
for an appointee to substitute or act with full authority and
responsibility of office, a Member who so acts shall cease to be a
Member of the bargaining unit for the period of substituting or acting
and shall receive a pro-rated stipend for the position.
5. Relationship between Senior Academic Administrators and Academic
Units.
Senior Academic Administrators shall be considered full Members of
academic units in which they teach/offer professional library service, except
that they must not participate in decisions by the unit on personnel matters.
ARTICLE 7.1 - REDUNDANCY
1. For the purposes of this Article, the declaration of a state of redundancy
by the Board shall mean that the number of Members employed in a
particular academic unit(s) must be reduced. The Board agrees that no
procedures other than those specified in this Article will be used to deal with
redundancies as defined in Paragraph 3. It is understood that the term
redundancy does not apply to limited term appointments that carry no
implication of renewal or continuation beyond the stated term in accordance
with Article 2.21.
2. The Board shall declare a state of redundancy by sending a written
notice to the Association and to the Vice-President, Academic that it has
approved a resolution for one of the reasons outlined in Paragraph 3 of this
Article. With this notice, the Board shall submit a detailed report specifying
the reasons why the redundancy is justified and the exact magnitude of the
reduction believed to be necessary.
3. A declaration of redundancy by the Board may be initiated in one of
two (2) ways:
a) Senate may resolve to terminate a Faculty, Department/ School or
program for reasons other than Financial Exigency. For the purpose of
this Article, a program is defined as a course of study previously
approved by the Senate and leading to a degree or a diploma. Should
the program involve more than one Faculty or Department/ School, the
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 113

plural should be understood in the following paragraphs. If the Board
resolves to approve Senate's decision, then a program redundancy shall
be declared.
b) The Vice-President, Academic may make a submission to the
Board that a particular academic unit(s) has (have) a larger number of
Members than necessary to fulfil its (their) program and service
teaching requirements in the light of student demand. Such a
redundancy shall be known as a workload redundancy. The Board
agrees that it will not declare a workload redundancy if such an action
will result in insufficient academic personnel for that unit(s) to continue
to offer a viable program(s). The onus shall be on the Board to show
that the proposed reductions are consistent with normal workloads as
defined in Article 2.10 and that the proposed reductions will not create
an inequitable workload for the unit(s) affected by the redundancies.
4. Redundancies may be justified only for bona fide academic reasons
and/or on the grounds of insufficient student demand. When insufficient
student demand is used as a justification, such lack of demand must be
demonstrable over a period of at least three (3) years and projections into the
future must not indicate any appreciable increase in this student demand.
5. As a result of the Board's declaration, a Redundancy Committee shall
be formed. This Committee shall hold its first meeting within fifteen (15)
days of receipt by the Association of the Board's notice as specified in
paragraph 2 hereof. Within ten (10) days of receipt of that notice, the
Association shall forward to the Vice-President, Academic the names of
three (3) Members who shall serve on the Redundancy Committee.
6. The Redundancy Committee shall include the following:
a) Three (3) Members chosen by the Association
b) Three (3) individuals named by the Board
c) The Vice-President, Academic as non-voting Chairperson
7. Within sixty (60) days of its first meeting, the Redundancy Committee
shall make its final report to the Board (with a copy to the Association). The
Board shall make no new academic or administrative appointments nor shall
the Board order the reduction or redistribution of the actual number of
full-time Members of the bargaining unit, until the Redundancy Committee
has made its final report or until the time limit of sixty (60) days stated in
this paragraph has expired, whichever comes first.
8. It shall be the responsibility of the Redundancy Committee in
consultation with the Vice-President, Academic, the Dean/Director of the
Library and the Faculty/Library Personnel Committee to recommend who,
among the Members of the unit(s) under consideration, shall be affected by
redundancy.
9. Keeping in mind that the continuing academic function assigned to the
unit is of the highest priority, the Redundancy Committee shall consider the
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 114

following steps in the following order:
a) Non-renewal of limited term appointments within the unit.
b) Non-renewal of two-year probationary contracts within the unit.
c) Non-renewal of contracts of Members within the unit on
three-year probationary contracts.
d) Removal of a tenured Member from the unit.
10. If the Redundancy Committee decides that Members with tenure or on
a three-year probationary contract will be affected by Redundancy pursuant
to paragraph 9 hereof, it shall include, in its final recommendation to the
Board, a list of administrative and academic areas to which the Members
could be transferred, with or without a year's retraining, considering their
academic and professional qualifications.
11. If the Board approves a resolution to act on the Redundancy
Committee's recommendation that a Member be declared redundant, then the
Board shall send the Member a written notice of its resolution. This notice
shall also contain an offer to the tenured Member of the following options:
a) Voluntary early retirement if the Member is age 55 or more.
b) Transfer in whole or in part to another academic unit for which the
Member is academically qualified or could become qualified with a
year's retraining if the transfer can be effected by one of the following
means:
(i) Filling a vacancy
(ii) Non-renewal of a limited term contract
(iii) Non-renewal of a two-year probationary contract
(iv) Non-renewal of contract of Members on three-year
probationary contract
In the unit to which the tenured Member is to be transferred.
c) Transfer to an appropriate administrative vacancy in the
University.
d) Termination of employment with severance pay.
e) Any other alternative that may be implemented in the future with
the mutual consent of the two (2) parties.
Any of the above options shall be implemented in accordance with the
terms of this Article. All proposed transfers to another academic unit must
have the approval of the Vice-President, Academic. If the offer is to transfer
one component of the Member's workload (this component restricted to
either teaching or research) to another academic area, such offer shall
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 115

include a statement of the duties of that Member and a method of weighing
the Member's evaluation for merit based on these special arrangements.
If the Board cannot offer at least one of (b), or (c), it shall offer to keep
the Members in their present position until such time as it can offer them one
of (b), or (c) unless Paragraph 16 applies.
12. Notwithstanding Article 2.21 - Appointment and Renewal, Members
with a two-year, initial probationary appointment can be refused the second
probationary appointment for reasons of redundancy in accordance with
Paragraph 9 or Paragraph 11 of this Article. In such instances, the Members
shall receive notice by 15 December of the academic year in which their
contract comes up for renewal. A written notice of non-renewal shall be sent
to the Members in which redundancy shall be clearly stated as the reason for
non-renewal.
13. Notwithstanding Articles 2.21 and 2.22, Members who are on a three
(3) year probationary appointment can be refused a renewal of their
appointment and/or tenure for reasons of redundancy in accordance with
Paragraph 9 or Paragraph 11 of this Article. In such instances, the Members
shall receive notice by 15 December of the academic year in which their
contract comes up for renewal. A written notice shall be sent to the
Members in which redundancy shall be clearly stated as the reason for
non-renewal and/or refusal to grant tenure. They shall be given severance
pay in accordance with Paragraph 18 hereof as well as recall rights in
accordance with Paragraph 18.
14. Tenured Members who accept a transfer to another academic area in
whole or in part, shall retain their rank as well as all pre-existing
employment rights. If such a transfer requires retraining, the Members shall
be granted leave to a maximum of one (1) year at 100% salary plus benefits.
Any tuition fees connected with the retraining shall be paid by the
University.
15. Tenured Members who accept a transfer to an administrative position in
accordance with Paragraph 11c) hereof cease to be Members of the
bargaining unit on the date that the transfer becomes effective. Members
transferred to an administrative position shall not be dismissed for a period
of five (5) years for reasons other than just cause and shall retain for this
period the full rights of Members of this Association, to grieve dismissal for
cause. Such Members shall not have their pay decreased as a result of the
transfer but they shall receive only the basic percentage increase to salary
scale and no increments until the normal salary level for their administrative
position has reached their own. For a period of five (5) years from the date
of their appointment to the administrative position, the Members shall have
first right of refusal of any academic vacancy within Laurentian for which
they are judged by the Vice-President, Academic to be academically
competent.
16. Where a redundancy results from the termination of a program per
Paragraph 3a) and when all transfer provisions have been exhausted, the
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 116

Board may lay-off a tenured Member provided that those Members who are
at least forty-five (45) years of age, have tenure and in respect of whom the
sum of years of seniority from the effective date of tenure plus age equals
fifty-five (55) shall be exempt from lay-off.
Costs associated with any arbitration arising out of lay-off shall be
distributed in accordance with Article 8.3. The usual burden of proof shall
apply.
17. Groups and/or individuals who are selected for redundancy may grieve
their selection (under Article 8.3) on the grounds of bias or procedural error,
as well as on the grounds that the criteria for selection have been applied in a
manner which is discriminatory or is in bad faith. This right to grieve
includes the right to challenge the validity of the redundancy but not the
right to challenge the Board's authority to initiate Redundancy procedures.
Tenured Members who wish to remain in the employ of the University
and who have been offered transfer but do not wish to accept the offer must
grieve this transfer within thirty (30) days of receipt of the offer. If the
Arbitration Board concludes that the Members' refusal is well founded, the
Members retain their original positions. If the Arbitration Board concludes
that the Members' refusal are not well founded or that another suitable
transfer is available, then the Members must accept the transfer within thirty
(30) days of receiving a copy of the decision or else the Members'
employment shall be terminated. The effective date of notice shall be the
date that the arbitrator's report is received by the Members. The Members
shall retain recall and notice of termination rights but shall lose their rights to
all severance payments and benefits.
18. All Members who are on tenured or three-year probationary contracts,
and whose appointments are terminated pursuant to this Article shall have
rights as set out hereafter:
a) (i) Twelve (12) months' notice in writing or any equivalent
combination of notice plus salary followed by
(ii) Six (6) months' salary plus one (1) month's salary for each
year as a full-time employee provided that no Member on a
three-year probationary contract receives less than nine (9)
months' salary and no tenured Member receives less than eighteen
(18) months' salary.
All payments under this paragraph shall be based on the Members' total
regular salary including the University's contribution to pension and
other benefit plans for their final full academic year of service at the
University. In no case shall the number of months' salary paid under
this paragraph exceed the time remaining until the normal retirement
age of the Member.
b) First right of refusal of all academic vacancies within Laurentian
University, for which they have academic competence as judged by the
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 117

Vice-President, Academic in consultation with the unit to which the
individual is to be appointed for a period of three (3) years for a
Member on a three (3) year probationary contract and five (5) years for
a tenured Member from the effective date of termination. Individuals
who accept such positions shall return to the University at the rank they
held when their appointments were terminated, with full recognition for
years of service at Laurentian. Disputes arising out of these recall
procedures are referable to the grievance and arbitration process set out
in this Agreement.
Individuals who are recalled pursuant to this Article shall have up to
thirty (30) days to accept such recall offer, and shall terminate their
alternative employment and take up the offered post, as soon as they are
contractually able to do so but in no instance later than six (6) months
after accepting the recall offer.
c) Reasonable efforts by the Board to assist a laid off Member in
obtaining suitable alternative employment including the use of
professional assistance as well as access to University resources.
d) Reasonable access to library, laboratory and computer facilities
subject to the agreement of the Dean of the Faculty or Director of the
Library concerned until suitable alternative employment is secured or
for three (3) years in the case of a Member on a 3-year probationary
contract or for five (5) years in the case of a tenured Member if suitable
alternative employment has not been secured.
e) Eligibility for themselves and their dependants for exemption from
tuition and Physical Education fees until suitable alternative
employment is secured or for three (3) years in the case of a Member
on a 3-year probationary contract or for five (5) years in the case of a
tenured Member if suitable alternative employment has not been
secured.
19. Nothing in this Article shall limit the total amount of severance benefits
that a tenured Member might privately negotiate with the Board.
20. All grievances submitted under the terms of this Article shall go
directly to arbitration in accordance with Article 8.3 - Grievance and
Arbitration. Unless stated otherwise in this Article, within fifteen (15) days
of receipt of the written notice containing the decision which the Members
wish to grieve, the Members must give notice in writing to the Board of their
intention to submit that decision to Arbitration.
ARTICLE 7.2 - FINANCIAL EXIGENCY
1. The Board of Governors and the Association agree that the first duty of
the University is to ensure that its academic priorities remain paramount,
particularly with regard to the quality of instruction, library service and
research, and the preservation of academic freedom.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 118

2. For the purposes of this Article, Financial Exigency shall be defined as
substantial and recurring deficits, which threaten the long-term solvency of
the University as a whole.
3. Reductions in academic staff for reasons of financial exigency shall
occur only in extraordinary circumstances, and only then after efforts to
alleviate the financial crisis by economies in all other segments of the budget
have been undertaken and after all reasonable means of improving the
University's revenues have been exhausted.
4. Members may be laid off in accordance with this Article only in the
event that a state of financial exigency has been both declared and confirmed
pursuant to the procedures contained in this Article.
5. In the event that the Board of Governors considers that a financial
exigency exists, within the meaning of Paragraph 2, it may give notice of
such a belief. As of the date of such notice the procedures specified in this
Article shall apply, and no new appointments may be made to either the
academic or administrative staff complement.
6. Within two (2) days of giving notice of its belief that a financial
exigency exists, the Board of Governors shall forward to the Faculty
Association all financial documentation relevant to the alleged state of
financial exigency.
7. Within fifteen (15) days of the notice specified in Paragraph 5 above,
the parties shall establish a Financial Commission which will consider the
alleged financial exigency and either (a) confirm it (under whatever
conditions it chooses to impose) or (b) reject it.
8. The Financial Commission shall be chosen, as is an Arbitration Board
per Article 8.3. It is agreed that in this instance no Member of the Financial
Commission shall be a government official, and the Minister of Labour, if
requested to appoint a Chairperson, shall choose a person who is not in the
employ of a government. Decisions of the Financial Commission under this
Article shall be final and binding on all parties. In this regard the Financial
Commission shall be deemed to be an Arbitration Board.
9. The onus of proof shall be on the Board to establish to the satisfaction
of the Financial Commission that a state of financial exigency exists within
the meaning of this Article.
10. Within seven (7) days of the choice of a Chairperson, the Financial
Commission shall meet and invite and consider submissions on the
University's financial condition. Inter alia it shall consider:
a) Whether the University's financial position (as evidenced from the
total budget and not just the academic or salary components thereof)
constitutes a bona fide budgetary crisis such that deficits projected by
generally accepted accounting principles are expected to continue for
more than two (2) fiscal years.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 119

b) Whether in view of the primacy of academic goals at the
University the reduction of academic staff is a reasonable type of cost
saving.
c) Whether all reasonable means of achieving cost-saving in other
areas of the University budget have been explored and exhausted.
d) Whether all reasonable means of improving the University's
revenue position have been explored and exhausted.
e) Whether every effort has been made to secure further assistance
from the provincial government.
f) Whether enrolment projections are consistent with a proposed
reduction in the academic staff complement.
g) Whether all means of reducing the academic staff complement
including voluntary early retirement, voluntary resignation, voluntary
reduced workload, voluntary redeployment and leaves, etc. have been
exhausted. and
h) Whatever other matters it considers relevant.
11. The Financial Commission will normally be expected to hand down its
Report and deliver a copy to the Board and to the Association within sixty
(60) days of its first meeting. If the Commission finds that a state of
financial exigency does not exist, no reductions of academic staff for reasons
of financial exigency may take place. If the Commission finds that a
financial exigency does exist, its Report shall specify the amount of
reduction required, if any, in the budgetary allocation to salary and benefits
for Members of the bargaining unit. Any reduction in the budgetary
allocation for academic salaries and benefits may be made conditional upon
the further exploration of alternative cost-saving measures by the University,
and the Commission shall remain seized of its jurisdiction in this matter
pending the satisfactory exhaustion of all such specified alternatives. Within
five (5) days of receipt of the Report of the Financial Commission, the
parties shall meet and confer with respect to its implications.
12. Pursuant to the ruling of the Financial Commission, the Board of
Governors may reduce the budgetary allocation for salaries and benefits of
Members of the bargaining unit but such reduction shall not exceed the
amount of the reduction specified by the Commission. The decision of the
Board of Governors shall be taken and written notice thereof sent to the
Financial Commission within two (2) weeks of receipt of the notice
mentioned in Paragraph 11 above.
13. Within twenty (20) days the Financial Commission shall apportion
among the Faculties, Library and similar units, the reduction in the
budgetary allocation for salaries and benefits of the Members of the
bargaining unit. Whenever possible, such reductions will be divided in a
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 120

proportionate amount among the Faculties and Library within the University
unless there is a clear and substantial reason for doing otherwise.
14. Within thirty (30) days, the Faculties/Library through their respective
Faculty/Library Councils shall apportion the budgetary reduction among the
academic units within the Faculty/Library and determine which among its
Members are to be laid off. Whenever possible such reductions will be
divided among the units within a Faculty/Library in a proportionate amount
unless there is a clear and substantial reason for doing otherwise.
15. The principal criteria in the termination/lay-off of Members within a
department, school or similar unit shall be:
a) The possession of qualifications suitable for the continuing
function of the Faculty, School, Department or Library.
b) Quality of performance in teaching and research or scholarly
activity where applicable.
c) The possession of qualifications suitable for transfer with or
without retraining to another academic or administrative position within
the University.
d) Contributions to the wider community.
16. Within a unit, a tenured Member shall not be terminated in preference
to a non-tenured Member. For tenured Members, the more senior Member,
in terms of service determined from the date at which tenure at the
University became effective shall be retained unless, after applying the
above criteria, there is a clear and substantial reason for doing otherwise.
17. Those Members who are at least forty (40) years of age, have tenure
and in respect of whom the sum of years of seniority from the effective date
of tenure plus age equals at least fifty-five (55) shall be exempt from lay-off
until all other academic staff within the Faculty/Library and not included in
this category have been laid off.
18. Should the Faculty/Library Council fail to determine within thirty (30)
days who among its Members is to be laid off, it shall be the responsibility of
the Deans/Director of the Library to apportion the budgetary reduction
within their faculty/library. Should the Deans/Director of the Library fail to
make such a decision within seven (7) days, the Financial Commission shall
make the apportionment of the budgetary reduction.
19. Members who are selected for lay-off under this Article shall be
provided with written notice of the reasons for their selection. Lay-offs
under this Article shall not be treated or recorded as dismissals for cause.
20. After the selection of the Members who are to be laid off, but prior to
the implementation of such lay-offs, the Board shall make every reasonable
effort to secure positions elsewhere in the University, including
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 121

administrative positions, for those Members who are to be laid-off.
Members who accept alternative academic employment retain all
pre-existing employment rights, including credit for sabbaticals, salaries and
pensions. Members who accept alternative employment shall be given the
opportunity to retrain for a period of up to one (1) year for their new duties.
The employer shall pay any related tuition fees and full salary to the
Member during this retraining period.
21. Groups and/or individuals who are selected for lay-off by a
Faculty/Library Council or Dean/Director of the Library, may grieve their
selection under the Grievance and Arbitration Article 8.3 on the ground of
bias or procedural error, as well as on the grounds that the criteria for lay-off
have been applied in a manner that is discriminatory or is in bad faith. The
right to grieve does not include the right to challenge the validity of the
financial exigency.
22. All tenured and probationary Members whose appointments are
terminated pursuant to this Article shall have rights as set out hereafter:
a) (i) The University shall be obliged to offer twelve (12)
months’ notice or twelve (12) months' salary in lieu of notice
followed by;
(ii) One (1) month's salary for each year as a full-time employee
provided that no tenured Member shall receive less than twelve-
(12) month's salary.
All payments under this paragraph shall be based on the Members' total
salary including the University's contribution to pension and other
benefit plans for their final full academic year of service at the
University. In no case shall the number of months' salary paid under
this paragraph exceed the time remaining until the normal retirement
age of the Member.
b) First right of refusal of all academic vacancies within Laurentian
University, for which they have academic competence as judged by the
Vice-President, Academic in consultation with the unit to which the
individual is to be appointed for a period of three (3) years from the
effective date of termination. Individuals who accept such positions
shall return to the University at the rank they held when they were laid
off, with full recognition for years of service at Laurentian. Disputes
arising out of these recall procedures are referable to the Grievance and
Arbitration process set out in this Agreement.
Individuals who are recalled pursuant to this Article shall have up to
thirty (30) days to accept such recall offer, and shall terminate their
alternative employment and take up the offered post, as soon as they are
contractually able to do so but in no instance later than six (6) months
after accepting the recall offer.
c) Reasonable efforts by the Board to assist a laid off Member in
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 122

obtaining alternative employment including the use of professional
assistance as well as access to University resources.
d) Reasonable access to Library, laboratory and computer facilities
subject to the agreement of the Dean of the Faculty/Director of the
Library concerned until suitable alternative employment is secured or
for three (3) years whichever is less.
e) Eligibility for themselves and their dependants for exemption from
tuition and Physical Education fees until suitable alternative
employment is secured or for three (3) years, whichever is less.
23. Notice of academic vacancies shall be deemed to be good and sufficient
if they are sent by the Board of Governors to the Member's last known
address with a copy to the Association. Any Member who fails to reply
within thirty (30) days or who refuses a permanent position offered under
this Article shall lose all rights of recall.
24. A Member accepting a permanent position at Laurentian University
will no longer receive severance pay.
25. Any vacancy that occurs and that cannot be filled through the recall
procedures in this Article will be filled in accordance with the normal hiring
practices.
26. Tenured Members, whose appointments are terminated while they are
on leave as in Article 3.2, shall have the same rights as other tenured
Members in accordance with the terms of this Article.
27. Laid off Members who are recalled shall repay any portion of the
allowance specified in Paragraph 22 which exceeds their entitlement had
they continued to occupy their normal position.
28. The cost of the Financial Commission established under this Article
shall be borne by the Board.
ARTICLE 8.1 - VALIDITY OF THE AGREEMENT
In the event of any of the provisions of this Agreement or any practices
established hereby being contrary to the provisions of any applicable law
hereinafter enacted, this Agreement shall not be deemed to be abrogated, but
shall be amended so as to conform with the regulations of any such law.
ARTICLE 8.2 - DURATION AND CONTINUANCE OF THE
AGREEMENT
1. This Agreement shall come into effect upon ratification by the parties
and shall continue in effect to 30 June 2005 and shall continue from year to
year thereafter unless either party gives the other party notice in writing, not
more than one hundred and fifty (150) days but not less than one hundred
and twenty (120) days prior to the thirtieth (30th) of June in 2005 or in any
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 123

year following 30 June 2005, that it desires to amend or terminate this
Agreement.
2. If notice is given as provided in paragraph 1 above, the two parties to
this Agreement shall meet within ten (10) days.
3. During any period of negotiations, this Agreement shall remain in
force. If a new Agreement has not been ratified by both parties by 30 June
of the year in which notice has been given as provided for in paragraph 1
above, then all the provisions of this Collective Agreement shall continue in
force (but these provisions shall not constitute a Collective Agreement) until
either:
a) A new Collective Agreement has been ratified by both parties.
or
b) Following conciliation, a strike or lockout is declared in
accordance with the Ontario Labour Relations Act.
4. At least ten (10) days before the termination of this Agreement, a
separate memorandum which shall continue in force thereafter, shall be
signed by the parties to the effect that in the event of a strike or lockout,
a) Members whose ongoing research requires access to University
facilities in order to prevent irreparable damage to research facilities
(such as loss of live and/or decomposable materials) shall be allowed
access to the facilities usually associated with such research. Such
access will be limited to maintaining the facilities and shall not be used
to continue the research. Such Members shall give notice in writing of
their access requirements to the President of LUFA and to their
Deans/Director of the Library. Such notice will normally be given at
least ten (10) days before the date of termination of the Agreement.
b) The Association will assume the costs of maintaining Members'
eligibility in the University's hospital, extended health and dental care
plans.
ARTICLE 8.3 - GRIEVANCE AND ARBITRATION
1. For the purposes of this Article:
a) A "grievance" shall mean any difference arising from the
interpretation, application, administration or alleged violation of the
Agreement (including any question as to whether a matter is arbitrable).
b) A "grievor" or "party to a grievance" may include:
(i) An individual Member or group of Members with or without
the formal support of the Association against the Board;
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 124

(ii) The Association on behalf of an individual Member or group
of Members, or on its own behalf against the Board;
(iii) The Board against the Association, an individual Member or
a group of Members except as otherwise prohibited in this
Agreement.
c) "Working days" shall mean Monday through Friday, excluding
Recognised and other Holidays identified in Article 3.0 including the
customary Christmas recess, as well as the months of July and August.
2. The Association and the Board agree to make every effort to settle
grievances promptly by informal and amicable means.
3. Notwithstanding paragraph 2 above, a grievor shall have recourse to the
grievance procedures set out below if such grievor is convinced that no
settlement can be reached by informal means, unless otherwise specified in
this Agreement.
4. There shall be no discrimination, harassment or coercion of any kind
practised against any persons involved in these procedures.
5. All communications required under these procedures shall be in writing
and shall be delivered by registered mail or with written proof of receipt.
6. All parties to a grievance shall be bound by and shall promptly
implement all decisions arrived at under the procedures described in this
Article.
7. Applicability of Grievance and Arbitration Procedures
a) The following decisions will not be subject to grievance:
(i) Non-renewal of term appointments per Article 2.21
(ii) The award of a merit increment per Article 4.20.
b) The following decisions will be subject to grievance only in the
case of allegations of violations of academic freedom, significant
procedural irregularities or discrimination:
(i) The non-renewal of a probationary contract when the Vice-
President, Academic confirms a negative recommendation of an
FPC/FFPC/LPC.
(ii) The denial of a first application for promotion to a particular
rank when the Vice-President, Academic confirms a negative
recommendation of an FPC/FFPC/LPC (and the denial of a second
application for promotion where the two applications are made in
consecutive years).
(iii) Any tenure decision which does not result in the termination
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 125

of employment.
c) Grievances concerning Renewal as per Article 2.21 - Appointment
and Renewal, concerning tenure as per Article 2.22 - Tenure Evaluation
Procedures, and concerning promotion as per Article 2.23 - Promotion
Procedures, shall proceed directly to arbitration as set forth in this
Article.
8. Grievance Procedure:
a) Step No. 1:
The grievor shall present a notice of grievance in writing to the
Dean/Director of the Library in the case of a Member or to the
President of the Association in the case of the Board within thirty (30)
working days of the date upon which the grievor had notice of the event
or decision giving rise to the grievance. The notice of grievance shall
include:
(i) The article of the Agreement claimed to have been relied
upon or claimed to have been violated, misinterpreted or
improperly applied;
(ii) The facts upon which the grievance is based;
(iii) The remedy sought;
(iv) The result of the informal stage; and
(v) In the event of a grievance concerning renewal, tenure or
promotion, as per Article 8.3 (7) c, the name of the grievor’s
appointee to the Arbitration Panel.
The Dean/Director of the Library concerned or the Association
President shall answer the grievance within five (5) working days. If
the grievance is not satisfactorily settled at Step No. 1 or if the answer
of the Dean/Director of the Library or the Association President is not
given within five (5) working days, the grievor may elect to proceed to
Step No. 2
b) Step No. 2:
The grievors shall give written notice of their grievance to the Joint
Grievance Committee within five (5) working days of the date on
which the Dean's/Director of the Library's or Association President's
response was due under Step No. 1. The written notice to the Joint
Grievance Committee shall outline the grievance together with any
answer received from the Dean/Director of the Library or Association
President and shall include the notice of grievance.
The Joint Grievance Committee shall meet to hear such grievances
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 126

within fifteen (15) working days of receipt of notice. At this stage the
Association and/or the University may include a professional or
technical advisor. The Joint Grievance Committee shall communicate
its decision in writing to the parties within ten (10) working days of its
last meeting on the issue. If the decision of the JGC is not given within
the specified ten- (10) working day limit, the grievor may elect to
proceed to Step No. 3.
c) Step No. 3:
Notice of intent to submit the grievance to arbitration shall be given:
(i) Within fifteen working days of the date of the notice of the
decision of the JGC;
or
(ii) At the expiration of the time limit for the JGC to produce a report;
or
(iii) With the notice of grievance concerning renewal, tenure, or
promotion.
With any notice of intent to submit the grievance to arbitration, the
grievor shall advise the other party to the grievance of the name and
address of their appointee to the arbitration board.
Within five (5) working days of receipt of the above notice, the other
party shall respond by naming its nominee to the arbitration board.
d) Omission of Steps:
By mutual agreement of the parties, one or more steps of this procedure
may be omitted.
9. Joint Grievance Committee
a) The JGC shall be composed of three voting Members. One
Member (and an alternate) shall be nominated by the Board, and one
Member (and an alternate) shall be nominated by the Association. The
nominees of the Board and the Association (and their alternates) shall
serve for a one- (1) year term.
b) The third Member of the Joint Grievance Committee who shall act
as Chairperson shall be chosen from a list prepared for this purpose.
c) Within thirty (30) days of ratifying this Collective Agreement the
Association and the Board shall establish a list consisting of at least five
(5) persons who have been mutually agreed upon, after having verified
that such persons would be willing to act as Chairperson of the JGC.
d) The procedure for choosing a Chairperson shall be by sequential
order from the list provided in (c) above. If the person next to serve is
not available within the time limits, then the next person shall be
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 127

chosen and so on.
e) Each Chairperson shall be chosen to hear a single grievance with
the exception that should more than one grievance be scheduled for a
single sitting, the person chosen as above shall act as a Chairperson for
all grievances scheduled for that sitting.
f) For each sitting of the JGC the chairperson shall be paid an
honorarium of five hundred ($500) dollars of which one half shall be
paid by the Board and one half by the Association.
g) The JGC shall establish its own procedures and may invite any
person to appear before it and may require the production of any
document from a Member's Personnel file.
h) Members of the JGC shall have a single vote.
i) Copies of any documentary evidence filed before the JGC will be
supplied to the other party to the grievance.
j) The JGC shall confine itself to the grievance submitted to it and
shall have no authority to determine any other issue or issues not
submitted to it.
k) The JGC shall not have jurisdiction to amend or add to any of the
provisions of this agreement, nor to give any decision inconsistent with
the terms of this agreement.
l) If a grievance presented to it arises strictly out of a claim of
non-compliance with procedures set out in this Agreement, the JGC
shall direct that the matter be reconsidered in accordance with those
procedures.
m) The JGC shall render its decision in the form of a written
resolution and shall include reasons for its decision.
n) The JGC shall not be construed as an Arbitration Board and any
grievance may be taken to arbitration by either party unless otherwise
specified in this agreement.
10. The Arbitration Board:
a) The Arbitration Board shall consist of three (3) Members, the two
(2) Members named by the parties to the grievance in accordance with
the procedures at Step No. 3 of this Article and a Chairperson who shall
be chosen by mutual agreement between the two parties. In the event
that the two parties to the grievance are unable to agree upon a
Chairperson within five (5) working days of the appointment of the
other two nominees to the Arbitration Board, the Chairperson shall be
the Minister of Labour of the Province of Ontario, or the Chairperson's
nominee.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 128

b) No persons may be appointed to an Arbitration Board in relation
to any grievance which would involve a conflict of interest because of
their personal involvement in the matter that gives rise to the grievance.
c) The Chairperson shall convene the Members of the Arbitration
Board within twenty (20) working days after being constituted.
d) The Arbitration Board shall confine itself to the grievance
submitted for arbitration and shall have no authority to determine any
other issue or issues.
e) The arbitrators shall not have any power to alter any of the
provisions of this Agreement, nor to substitute any new provisions for
any existing provisions, nor to give any decision inconsistent with the
terms and provisions of this Agreement.
f) Within thirty (30) working days of its last hearing the Arbitration
Board shall render its decision. A decision of the majority shall be the
decision of the Arbitration Board and where there is no majority
decision, the decision of the Chairperson shall be the decision of the
Arbitration Board.
g) Each party to the grievance shall bear the costs of its nominee to
the Arbitration Board and the costs of the Chairperson shall be shared
equally, provided that the arbitrators may, in their decision, make any
other disposition as to costs.
h) In cases involving termination of a Member's appointment where a
violation by the University of Article 1.21 - Academic Freedom or
Article 1.22 - No Discrimination has been established, the costs of the
arbitration, including the costs of the arbitrators, shall normally be
borne by the University.
i) A grievance initiated at the Arbitration stage pursuant to paragraph
7 of Article 8.3 shall be made in the same form as set out in paragraph 8
above and must be presented within thirty (30) working days of the date
upon which the grievor had notice of the event or decision giving rise to
the grievance.
11. Notwithstanding the provisions of Paragraph 10 above, the parties to
the grievance may agree to submit any particular grievance to a single
arbitrator who shall alone constitute the Arbitration Board.
12. No grievance initiated or in process prior to the date of ratification of
this Agreement shall fall under the terms of this Agreement except by
explicit codicil signed by the parties to this Agreement.
13. Any of the time limits prescribed by this Article may be varied by
agreement between the parties to the grievance.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 129

14. It is understood and agreed that where an individual Member proceeds
with a grievance without the formal support of the Association, any
settlement of such a grievance shall not constitute a precedent to be used
against the Association or the Board in any future grievance.
ARTICLE 8.4 - STRIKES AND LOCKOUTS
1. The University and the Association hereby agree that there shall not be,
during the currency of this Agreement, any lockout by the University or any
strike by Members of the Association.
2. A Member shall not be dismissed per Article 2.41 or disciplined per
Article 2.40 for refusing to cross a picket line on campus which has been
established in full compliance with existing laws. The Board may however,
dock such a Member's salary by 1/365 for each day lost.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 130

APPENDIX A-1
[OLRB Designation of the Bargaining Unit]
ONTARIO LABOUR RELATIONS BOARD
FILE NO. 3328-93-R
BETWEEN:
Laurentian University Faculty Association "Applicant"
v.
Laurentian University of Sudbury "Responding Party"
BEFORE:
Kevin Whitaker, Vice-Chair, and
Board Members J.A. Rundle and P.V. Grasso.
DECISION OF THE BOARD:
October 31, 1995
1. This is an application for combination of bargaining units pursuant to
section 7(1) of the Labour Relations Act to which the responding party has
consented.
2. The applicant seeks the combination of two bargaining units consisting
of employees of the responding party all of whom are represented by the
applicant trade union.
3. Having regard to the agreement of the parties dated October 26, 1995,
and the provisions of section 7(1) of the Act, the combination of the units
requested is granted. The applicant's bargaining rights now pertain to the
following combined bargaining unit:
All members of faculty, including professional librarians, employed by
Laurentian University of Sudbury in the Regional Municipality of Sudbury,
save and except administrators at or above the rank of director, academic
staff, at or above the rank of dean, registrar, special assistant to the president,
director of academic staff relations, translators, director of the library,
director of graduate studies and research, members of the board of
governors, and athletic coaches required as part of their duties to teach
degree credit activity courses.
For the purposes of clarity the parties agree that:
1) The bargaining unit does not include full-time faculty members
employed by Laurentian University for a period of not more than one year
while on leave from another university, persons employed through the centre
for continuing education to conduct instruction at off-campus centres located
outside the Regional Municipality of Sudbury or through distance education
delivery modes, persons employed to teach courses intended primarily for
students who are not registered in a degree credit programme, persons
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 131

assigned responsibility for teaching portions of courses coordinated by
regular faculty members, such as teaching assistants, field consultants in
social work, clinical teachers in nursing, laboratory technicians, clinical
instructors, or outdoor school instructors.
2) The designation "members of the faculty including librarians" is
deemed to include those aforementioned employees of Laurentian
University who from time to time may be required to teach outside the City
of Sudbury, unless otherwise excluded.
4. The effective date of this combination of the said bargaining units
should be the earlier of (1) the date upon which the parties become bound by
a collective agreement covering the current part-time bargaining unit, or (2)
the date upon which notice to bargain is given by either party with respect to
the renewal of the current collective agreement between the parties covering
the full-time bargaining unit.
5. The expiry date of any first collective agreement covering the current
part-time bargaining unit shall be the expiry date of the current collective
agreement between the parties in respect of the current full-time bargaining
unit, notwithstanding section 41(8) of the Labour Relations Act, unless the
parties agree otherwise in writing.
"KEVIN WHITAKER"
for the Board
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 132

APPENDIX A-2
[1979 OLRB Designation of the Bargaining Unit (for reference only)]
OLRB CERTIFICATE AND DECISION
THE LABOUR RELATIONS ACT
BEFORE THE ONTARIO LABOUR RELATIONS BOARD
BETWEEN:
Laurentian University Faculty Association, "Applicant"
-and-
Laurentian University of Sudbury, "Respondent"
CERTIFICATE :
Upon the application of the applicant and in accordance with the provisions
of The Labour Relations Act, THIS BOARD DOTH CERTIFY Laurentian
University Faculty Association as the bargaining agent of all full time
members of faculty including full-time professional librarians employed by
Laurentian University of Sudbury, Ontario, to whom at least fifty per cent of
the salary at the University is paid by the University, save and except
President, Vice-President, Academic, Special Assistant to the President,
Deans, Director of the School of Graduate Studies, Directeur du Conseil de
l'enseignement en français, Director of the Library, part-time members of
faculty, technicians, faculty members employed by Laurentian University for
a period of not more than one year while on leave from another university or
other employer and members of the Board of Governors.
This certificate is to be read subject to the terms of the Board's decision(s) in
this matter and, accordingly, by the bargaining unit described herein is to be
read subject to any qualifications referred to in the said decision(s) of the
Board.
DATED at Toronto this 9th day of July, 1979.
ONTARIO LABOUR RELATIONS BOARD
D.K. AYNSLEY
Registrar
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 133

APPENDIX A-3
[1979 OLRB Decision (for reference only)]
ONTARIO LABOUR RELATIONS BOARD
FILE NO. 1463-78-R
BETWEEN:
Laurentian University Faculty Association, (Applicant)
-and-
Laurentian University of Sudbury, (Respondent)
-and-
Group of Employees, (Objectors)
BEFORE:
Arthur Haladner, Vice-Chairperson and
Board Members J.D. Bell and W.F. Rutherford.
APPEARANCE:
C.M. Mitchell, T. Bartley and R. Kari for the applicant;
K.R. Valin for the respondent;
Jean Eugene Havel for the objectors.
DECISION OF THE BOARD:
1. On November 27, 1978 the applicant, Laurentian University Faculty
Association, applied for certification for a unit of employees of Laurentian
University. This hearing was called for the purpose of considering an
objection to the conduct of the representation vote taken on April 4, 1979
and for the purpose of hearing representations from the parties on the issue
of whether certain persons classified as "director" should be included or
excluded from the bargaining unit.
2. At the hearing the Board indicated that while it regretted the fact that
the ballot in this matter had not been printed in both French and English, it
was not, in the circumstances, prepared to direct a new vote having regard to
the delay and prejudice both to the applicant and to the future course of
representation proceedings that such a direction would create. In so ruling,
the Board pointed out that the desire for a French and English ballot had not
been communicated until after the vote had been conducted and the results
known. This, despite there having been, prior to the vote, ample opportunity
to express that desire. The Board also expressed its opinion that the absence
of a French and English ballot did not affect the outcome of the
representation vote. In that vote the employees voted 107 to 81 in favour of
the applicant.
3. Dealing now with the issue of Director status - the report of the Labour
Relations Officer indicates that for the most part recommendations for hiring
are made by the school's academic council or by the faculty as a group, and
submitted to authorities superior to the director where the decision is made.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 134

Apart from Dean Hilldrup, who made one decision and one effective
recommendation - after conducting interviews in South Africa when the
senate appointments and promotions committee was not available - the
involvement of directors in the hiring process is minimal.
4. Directors' role in evaluation of faculty members is primarily one of
co-ordination, i.e., calling for recommendations from other faculty members,
the school council or the appointments and promotions committee, and
submitting them to higher authorities.
5. Directors submit recommendations on promotions and tenure; however,
there was no evidence that their recommendations, if contrary, outweigh
those of the faculty as a group. Moreover, these recommendations are for
the most part made with the participation of faculty members.
6. Directors' recommendations on salary are limited to whether an
increase should be granted. They have no discretion to recommend specific
amounts.
7. Directors' role in discipline of faculty members is minimal, being
limited to the occasional reprimand - in one of the two examples given after
consultation with faculty and the Dean/Director of the Library. Directors
have no authority to discharge or suspend.
8. One director made a sabbatical recommendation which, as far as she
knew, was accepted. However, the others had no independent involvement
with the process, although one thought he could make a negative
recommendation.
9. Directors' role in budget formulation is primarily consultative; in
preparing budget recommendations, they consult with the school budget
committee or their colleagues, and decisions are made at the Senate level.
Directors have no authority to re-allocate funds having to do with salaries.
10. Directors assign work to the secretaries on the support staff and
evaluate their performance. However, the time spent in the
performance of these functions is minimal, and other faculty members are
involved.
11. In Carleton University, (1975) OLRB Rep. June 500, the Board pointed
out that there are significant differences between the university model, where
decision-making is shared by a peer group, and the industrial model of
hierarchic authority, where ultimate power resides above - typically, with the
plant manager - and filters down through a management chain to the primary
level of supervision - the unit supervisor, or foreman. It stated:
While the Board of Governors is, in a general overall sense, responsible
for the business operations of the institution, and the senate for its academic
policies, the power of detailed decision-making is diffuse and extends into
the institution's basic organizational unit, the department. Moreover,
management-type-decisions are made not only by the Board of Governors,
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 135

the senate, the president, the senior administrative staff, the deans, but by
faculty members as well and in more recent times, students, as members of
various committees or boards...Important determinations of general
application are made at the higher levels and in this sense, a parallel with the
industrial model remains. What is novel is that many important decisions,
narrower in scope and having to do with the academic and personnel matters
applicable to limited groupings, do originate at the department level, subject
only to endorsation at the higher levels.
12. In determining that department chairmen were employees for purposes
of the Act and included in the bargaining unit, the Board in Carleton
concluded:
In those areas of greatest importance, hiring, tenure, promotion,
dismissal - the dominant role is played by the department collectively ... in
the more routine areas, while some potential for the exercise of independent
discretion exists, it is for the most part narrowly circumscribed. Moreover,
in a substantive sense, the decisions in these areas are of limited importance
... In our view, the infrequent exercise of authority over the office staff poses
no danger of conflict of interest within the unit. It is important to emphasize
that the overwhelming proportion of the chairperson's duties have nothing
whatever to do with the supervision or control of the department's small
clerical staff...
See also University of Windsor, (1977) OLRB REP. May, 300, where
the Board, following Carleton, determined that department heads did not
exercise managerial functions for purposes of section 1(3) (b) of the Act and
were, therefore, appropriate members of the academic bargaining unit.
13. The Board is of the opinion that the Directors, whose status is in
dispute, play a similar role in the decision-making process at Laurentian to
that performed by department chairmen in Carleton and department heads in
Windsor. While there are some differences in certain isolated areas, the
Board is satisfied that their duties and responsibilities are not in any
fundamental respect different. The evidence is that they play a part in a
process of shared decision-making and do not, in the areas of greatest
importance, i.e., hiring, tenure, promotion, and dismissal, play a dominant
role which would entail the risk of a conflict of interest. Our conclusion,
after considering the evidence, is that the Directors of the School of
Engineering, Translators and Interpreters, Nursing, Social Work, Education
and Physical Education do not exercise managerial functions within the
meaning of section 1(3) (b) of The Labour Relations Act and, accordingly,
that they are included in the bargaining unit. The Director of the School of
Graduate Studies and Director, Conseil de l'enseignement en français are
excluded from the bargaining unit by agreement of the parties.
14. Having regard to the foregoing, the Board finds that
All full-time members of faculty including full-time professional
librarians employed by Laurentian University of Sudbury at Sudbury,
Ontario, to whom at least fifty per cent of the salary at the University is paid
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 136

by the University, save and except President, Vice-President, Academic,
Deans, Director of the School of Graduate Studies, Directeur du Conseil de
l'enseignement en français, Director of the Library, part-time members of
faculty, technicians, faculty members employed by Laurentian University for
a period of not more than one year while on leave from another university or
other employer and members of the Board of Governors
constitute a unit of employees of the respondent appropriate for collective
bargaining.
CLARITY NOTES
(1) The designation "all full-time faculty including full-time
professional librarians employed by Laurentian University of Sudbury
at Sudbury" is deemed to include those aforementioned employees on
the payroll of Laurentian University who from time to time may be
requested to teach at various locations outside the City of Sudbury.
(2) "All full-time faculty (professional librarians) shall mean such
persons holding an academic rank at present described as instructor,
lecturer, assistant professor, associate professor or full professor
(general librarian, assistant librarian, associate librarian or full librarian)
and whose duties and responsibilities are fifty per cent or more of the
full status employees in the same classification in the same academic
unit.
15. A certificate will issue to the applicant.
"Arthur Haladner"
For the Board
9th July, 1979
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 137

APPENDIX A-4
[1984 OLRB Designation of Sessional Bargaining Unit (for reference only)]
ONTARIO LABOUR RELATIONS BOARD
FILE NO. 3329-93-R
BETWEEN:
Laurentian University Faculty Association, "Applicant"
and
Laurentian University of Sudbury, "Responding Party"
CERTIFICATE:
Upon the application of the applicant and in accordance with the provisions
of The Labour Relations Act, THIS BOARD DOTH CERTIFY Laurentian
University Faculty Association as the bargaining agent of all the faculty
including part-time professional librarians employed by Laurentian
University of Sudbury in the City of Sudbury, save and except administrators
at or above the rank of Director, Academic Staff, at or above the rank of
Dean, Registrar, Special Assistant to the President, Manager of Employment
and Staff Relations, Translators, Director of the Library, Members of the
Board of Governors and athletic coaches required as part of their duties to
teach degree credit activity courses.
This certificate is to be read subject to the terms of the Board's decision(s) in
this matter and, accordingly, the bargaining Unit described herein is to be
read subject to any qualifications referred to in the said decision(s) of the
Board.
DATED at Toronto this 28th day of March, 1994.
ONTARIO LABOUR RELATIONS BOARD
T.A. Innis
Registrar
The above description of the bargaining unit is subject to the following
qualifications:
CLARITY NOTE:
For the purposes of clarity, the parties agree that the bargaining unit does not
include full-time faculty on reduced assignments, persons employed through
the Centre for Continuing Education, persons employed to teach courses
primarily for students who are not registered in a degree credit programme,
persons not assigned responsibility for teaching one or more degree credit
courses such as Teaching Assistants, Field Consultants in Social Work,
Clinical Teachers in Nursing, technicians, laboratory, clinical or outdoor
school instructors in courses coordinated by faculty members.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 138

APPENDIX B
[Prefacing notes in the Memorandum of Agreement adding clauses to the
1992-95 Collective Agreement concerning employment of
Sessional (part-time) faculty (for reference only)]
Memorandum of Agreement
BETWEEN:
The Laurentian University Faculty Association
and
The Board of Governors of Laurentian University of Sudbury
RE: Terms and Conditions of Employment of the
Sessional (part-time) Bargaining Unit.
Whereas a decision of the Ontario Labour Relations Board dated 31 October
1995 (a copy of which is attached as an appendix) and the ratification of this
Memorandum of Agreement give effect to a Merger of the previous Full-
time Faculty Bargaining Unit and the previous Sessional Faculty Bargaining
Unit, the 1992-1995 Collective Agreement between the above Parties,
subject to the following variations, shall be read as a single Collective
Agreement between the Parties, covering all Members of the new Merged
Bargaining Unit of Full-time and Sessional Members.
This Memorandum of Agreement shall be in force for the period from 1 July
1994 to 31 March 1996, the latter date being the date to which LUFA 1992-
1995 has been extended, pursuant to a notice given under section 35 of the
Social Contract Act (Bill 48).
Sessional Members of the Bargaining Unit shall be covered by the same
Collective Agreement articles as Full-time Members under Sections 0 (The
Agreement), 1 (Relations Between the Association and the Board), and 8
(Duration of the Agreement) of the LUFA 1992-95 Collective Agreement,
unless otherwise indicated. Sessional Members of the Bargaining Unit shall
also be covered by Articles 2.00 (Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of
Academics - A1 Teaching and A2 Professional Librarianship, only) 2.30
(Personnel Files), 2.40 (Disciplinary Measures), 3.0 (Recognized and Other
Holidays), 3.33 (Court Leaves), and 3.52 (Compassionate Leave).
Additional Articles relevant to Sessional Members only bear number
designations not used in LUFA 1992-95.
All other provisions, those covered by sections 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7, of the
LUFA 1992-95 Collective Agreement shall apply to Sessional Members only
when specifically indicated in this Memorandum of Agreement.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 139

(The clauses of the Memorandum of Agreement appear at the appropriate
places in the 1996-97 Collective Agreement)
DATED at Sudbury, 17 November 1995.
For Laurentian University For the Board of Governors of
Faculty Association Laurentian University of Sudbury
"R.D. Schell", M.A., D.Phil. "Hermann Falter", Ph.D.
LUFA Chief Steward Director, Academic Staff Relations
"Wendy Jerome", Ph.D. "Ron Chrysler", C.A.
LUFA President Vice-President, Administration
"Gary MacCoubrey", M.A. "Geoff Tesson", Ph.D.
"Leda Culliford", M.A.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 140

APPENDIX C
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY
SPECIAL VOLUNTARY EARLY RETIREMENT PLAN
1. Laurentian University plans to extend the Special Voluntary Early
Retirement Plan for full-time faculty members, hereafter called the Member,
with effect from July 1, 2000. The purpose of this program is to facilitate
renewal of faculty to the extent that this is possible without increasing
budgetary expenses or jeopardizing academic programs. Faculty renewal is
expected to have a positive impact on the organization through the
revitalization of academic departments and by helping to reduce hiring
problems anticipated in the future.
2. In the current financial climate, renewal is possible only if some senior
faculty choose to retire early. The Special Voluntary Early Retirement Plan
will provide an early retirement incentive to help make early retirements
possible. These programs are separate from the Pension Plan, and are to be
funded through savings in the operating budget owing to replacement at
lower salary levels.
3. The opportunity for this plan is provided by the fact that this program,
to a large degree, would be self-financing and that there will be no or
minimum increase in cost to the University.
4. To be eligible for Special Voluntary Early Retirement, the Member
must be:
a) five (5) years or less from the attainment of his/her Normal
Retirement Date, and
b) have completed at least fifteen (15) years of full-time service at
Laurentian University as of the proposed date of commencement of
Special Voluntary Early Retirement.
5. On any July 1 (January 1), a Member who is eligible under the
requirements described in the previous paragraph may choose to take Special
Voluntary Early Retirement. In such a case the Member shall apply in
writing to the Dean/Director of the Library of his/her Faculty/Library by no
later than the previous October 1 (April 1).
6. A Member who does not fully meet the eligibility criteria may apply
through the Dean/Director of the Library of his/her Faculty/Library for
individual consideration. Each application will be assessed on its merits. If
the proposed early retirement is judged to be of benefit to both the Member
and the University, the early retirement incentive as set out in this plan will
be made available. The University will consider applications from
individuals who are up to eight (8) years from attainment of their retirement
date. Key consideration for approval of such applications will be potential
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 141

recruitment problems for a replacement and the financial benefit of the
University associated with the proposal.
7. The granting of a Member's application may, but will not normally be
delayed by decision of the University. Such a delay may occur once only
and will be for a period of six months to one year.
8. A Member shall be notified by the Vice-President, Academic by
December 1 (June 1) in the year that the Member has applied for Special
Voluntary Early Retirement if the application has been granted for Special
Voluntary Early Retirement to commence the following July 1 (January 1) or
is to be delayed for six months or one year. The Member must confirm
his/her decision to take Special Voluntary Early Retirement by February 1
(August 1) immediately preceding the July 1 (January 1) when the Special
Voluntary Early Retirement period would commence. The Member's
confirmation will render the decision final.
9. A Member eligible for Special Voluntary Early Retirement may request,
before October 1 (April 1), a statement of the early retirement incentive and
benefit costs for the following year. All members applying for Special
Voluntary Early Retirement will automatically receive such a statement. The
Member will receive the statement no later than November 1 (May 1). A
Member eligible for early retirement shall be entitled to receive a one-time
reimbursement of up to $400 for the services of a financial consultant
(receipts required).
10. A decision to opt for Special Voluntary Early Retirement is final, and
the Member may not return to full-time or part-time employment at
Laurentian University unless requested and agreed to by the University.
11. The Special Voluntary Early Retirement Period for the individual
Member will be from the commencement date of Special Voluntary Early
Retirement and will continue until the earlier of the Member's normal
retirement date or death or to a maximum of five (5) years.
12. During the initial year of Special Voluntary Early Retirement, the
Member shall receive an early retirement incentive of 1.75% of salary (last
year of his/her full-time employment) times years or fractions thereof of full-
time service at early retirement to a maximum of 50% of the aforementioned
salary. (Leave of absence without pay is not included in the calculation of a
Member's years of service. Years of service under Reduced Voluntary
Workload, Article 3.31, will be prorated according to the percent workload
reduction). The Vice-President may, after discussion with the Member
concerned, increase the incentive percentage to address particular concerns.
Any increase in the incentive percentage over the formula amount must be
communicated with explanation to the Association.
13. During the subsequent years of Special Voluntary Early Retirement, the
Member shall receive an early retirement incentive increased each year by
the percentage increase of the faculty scale.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 142

14. While on Special Voluntary Early Retirement, the Member may wish to
continue to participate in the Laurentian University Retirement Plan. In such
case the University's share of contributions will be deducted from the early
retirement incentive. The contributions will be based on the salary of the last
year of his/her full-time employment escalated annually by the percentage
increase of the faculty salary scale. Furthermore, the Member will be
eligible for the minimum guaranteed pension based upon the aforementioned
escalated salary and years of Special Voluntary Early Retirement of paid
pension contributions. In this case the Member will be considered to be on
leave with pay and will be required to pay CPP and UIC contributions and
will not be eligible to the roll-over provisions described in the next
paragraph. The aforementioned is subject to the current Revenue Canada
Regulations.
15. If the Member chooses not to continue contributing to the Laurentian
University Retirement Plan, then he/she could be treated as though he/she
had terminated his/her employment with Laurentian. In that case, the
incentive payments could be treated as a retiring allowance so they would be
eligible for roll-over to an RRSP up to the legal limit. The allowable roll-
over amount may be spread over the years of the Special Voluntary Early
Retirement and the remaining incentive amount would be considered income
for the sake of calculating the annual RRSP contribution limit. In this case
there would be no deductions for CPP and UIC and the employer's cost
would be added to the early retirement incentive. The Member could collect
his/her pension in addition to the incentive if he/she so desired. If the
Member is at least 60 years of age, he/she may be eligible for full or partial
CPP benefits, provided he/she has contributed to the plan. For more
information, or to get application forms, call the Income Security Programs
Office, which is listed under Human Resources and Labour Canada of the
Government of Canada. The aforementioned is subject to the current
Revenue Canada Regulations.
16. During the Voluntary Early Retirement period, the benefits will apply as
follows:
a) Members considered to be on leave with pay will retain participation
in the Group Life Insurance, Dependent Group Life, Accidental Death
and Dismemberment, Hospital Care, Extended Medical (including
ManuAssist) and the Retirees Health Benefit Plan. Participation in the
Dental Plan is optional. The long-term disability benefit cannot be
continued. Members may also be exempt from the hospital care and
extended medical coverage if they have similar coverage through the
group plan of a spouse.
b) Members no longer considered employees may choose to retain
participation in Group Life Insurance, Dependent Group Life,
Accidental Death and Dismemberment, Hospital Care, Extended
Medical (including ManuAssist) and the Dental Plan. The long-term
disability benefit cannot be continued. Continued participation in these
plans will entitle the Member to receive a subsidy under the Retirees
Health Benefit Plan at normal retirement age.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 143

The cost sharing of the premiums for these benefits will be split according to
the cost sharing arrangement in the Faculty Collective Agreement. The life
insurance coverage will be based on three (3) times the early retirement
incentive to a maximum of $200 000. If improvements in benefits are
provided in subsequent Collective Agreements these improvements shall be
extended to the retirees on Special Voluntary Early Retirement. Members
who go on Special Voluntary Early Retirement will not be eligible for sick
leave. The employer's cost of those benefit plans in which the Member does
not retain participation will be added to the early retirement incentive. The
employer's cost will be based on the premium charged by the carrier and will
not include the Provincial Sales Tax.
17. Should the Member die during the Special Voluntary Early Retirement
Period, the payment will cease at the end of the month the death occurred.
Benefits and Pension contributions will also terminate as of the end of the
month of the Member's death.
18. A Member taking Special Voluntary Early Retirement would enjoy all
retiree privileges as well as tuition fee waiver.
19. Admission to the Special Voluntary Early Retirement Plan will be
available under this plan for a five (5) year period i.e. from July 1, 2000 to
June 30, 2005. If during this period the mandatory retirement age of sixty-
five (65) becomes inapplicable to Laurentian University faculty employees,
or if the Laurentian University Retirement Plan is amended to provide for
additional early retirement provisions to Laurentian University faculty
employees, the Special Voluntary Retirement Plan will be reviewed at that
time.
20. The provisions of this Special Voluntary Early Retirement Plan shall
apply as of the date of approval by the Board of Governors. These
provisions may be amended and/or extended for a further period with the
agreement of both the Board and the Association. Such decision will be
made prior to June 30, 2004. Early-retired Members at the time of
amendment or termination of these provisions will not be disadvantaged by
such amendment or termination.
The parties hereby agree to unanimously recommend this Plan to their
respective principals.
On behalf of the University On behalf of the Laurentian
University Faculty Association
_______________________ _______________________
Hermann Falter Anis Farah
_______________________ _______________________
Ronald E. Chrysler M.A. Beauvolsk
_______________________
Ronald Slater
Dated at Sudbury, Ontario, this 7th day of September, 1999.
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 144

APPENDIX D
Letter of Understanding
BETWEEN:
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY ASSOCIATION
and
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY OF SUDBURY
RE: Mutually Beneficial Arrangements for Leaves, Study Leaves
and Outplacement Leaves
The parties agree that in the current climate of financial restraint
opportunities may exist for combining temporary reduction in budgets with
opportunities for faculty academic and professional development through
flexible and innovative approaches to leaves of absence, study leaves etc.
The parties agree to explore and, if possible, implement proposals from
each other and faculty members that meet the above criteria.
DATED AT Sudbury, Ontario this 24th day of June, 1999.
_______________________ _________________________
Dr. Anis Farah Dr. Hermann Falter
for Laurentian University for Laurentian University
Faculty Association of Sudbury
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 145

APPENDIX E
Letter of Understanding
BETWEEN:
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY ASSOCIATION
AND
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY OF SUDBURY
RE: Ongoing Review of Benefits Program for Retired Employees
THE PARTIES AGREE that the Benefits Committee should continue to
review the benefits for retired employees within the parameters of the original
mandate with the view of:
a) finding options to improve the existing benefits plan; and
b) investigating to what extent benefits of the existing plan can be used
to offset costs of improving a spousal benefits plan with a different
employer; the committee will inform the parties and the retired
members of the outcome of the investigation as soon as it has been
completed.
DATED AT Sudbury, Ontario this 23rd day of September 1999.
_____________________________ ______________________________
Dr. Anis Farah, for Dr. Hermann Falter, for
Laurentian University Laurentian University of Sudbury
Faculty Association
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 146

APPENDIX F
Letter of Understanding
BETWEEN:
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY ASSOCIATION
AND
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY OF SUDBURY
RE: Early Retirement and Voluntary Severance Packages
THE PARTIES AGREE that any early retirement or severance
procedures that are not provided for in this Collective Agreement will be
subject to prior approval by the Parties before they are offered to the faculty.
THE PARTIES FURTHER AGREE that individual early retirement
or severance agreements that are not provided in this Collective Agreement
shall be subject to LUFA approval by way of Memoranda of Agreement.
DATED AT Sudbury, Ontario this 24th day of June 1999.
_____________________________ ______________________________
Dr. Anis Farah, for Dr. Hermann Falter, for
Laurentian University Laurentian University of Sudbury
Faculty Association
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 147

APPENDIX G
Letter of Understanding
BETWEEN:
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY ASSOCIATION
AND
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY OF SUDBURY
RE: Committee on Faculty Renewal
THE PARTIES AGREE to establish, for the duration of the
Collective Agreement, a committee to devise a strategy for faculty renewal as a
consequence of the impending retirement of a relatively large number of
faculty over the next several years. The Committee will consist of two
representatives of the Faculty Association (the president of the Association or
his/her representative and one other faculty member) and two representatives
of the Administration. Each of the Parties chooses its own representatives.
The Committee will report to the Parties by April 1 in each year of the
Agreement.
DATED AT Sudbury, Ontario this 29th day of June 1999.
_____________________________ ______________________________
Dr. Anis Farah, for Dr. Hermann Falter, for
Laurentian University Laurentian University of Sudbury
Faculty Association
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 148

APPENDIX H
Letter of Understanding
BETWEEN:
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY ASSOCIATION
and
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY OF SUDBURY
Re: Pension Committee
WHEREAS the Parties acknowledge that there is a need to review
various issues relating to the operation of the existing Pension Plan and the
Pension Committee; and
WHEREAS the Parties acknowledge the interest of other employee
groups in the outcome of such a review.
THE PARTIES AGREE to undertake to establish a committee with two
representatives chosen by LUFA and two representatives chosen by the
Board to undertake the following:
1. Examine the potential merits and implications of establishing a
separate Pension Plan or Pension Fund for LUFA and other current members
of the Pension Plan.
2. Review the current composition of the Pension Committee with a
view to address the issue of adequate representation of LUFA on this
Committee.
3. Investigate changes that can be made to address concerns of
employees affected by the current Revenue Canada limitation on maximum
pension benefits that can be paid under the minimum guarantee provisions of
the Plan.
THE PARTIES AGREE that a report on the results of this review will
be prepared by March 31, 2000.
THE PARTIES AGREE that in view of the importance of this review to
the interests of other employee groups, the committee will seek and
encourage input from these groups and provide an opportunity to discuss the
results of this review with these groups.
DATED AT Sudbury, Ontario this 22nd day of September 1999.
_______________________ _________________________
Dr. Anis Farah Dr. Hermann Falter
for Laurentian University for Laurentian University
Faculty Association of Sudbury
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 149

Collective Agreement 2002-2005 150

APPENDIX I
Letter of Understanding
BETWEEN:
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY ASSOCIATION
AND
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY OF SUDBURY
RE: Teaching Loads
WHEREAS teaching loads (number of courses and number of students
taught) at Laurentian should be examined in relation to teaching loads at other
Universities in Ontario; and
WHEREAS the Collective Agreement provides sufficient flexibility for
adjusting teaching assignments for individual faculty members, if such
adjustments are deemed necessary and desirable; and
WHEREAS teaching loads arise from a complicated interplay of many
related factors including the need to provide required courses for Programs
(including external accreditation requirements), optional courses to make
programs more attractive, pedagogical considerations that lead to limits on
sections sizes, very small classes, judgements about the suitability of related
courses for various programs, preferences of faculty members for teaching
courses in their area of specialization (regular or alternate stream appointments),
commitments to offer programs to meet external requirements for special grants
(i.e. bilingual grants etc), requirements for replacement of faculty on leaves,
graduate programs in the same or related areas, undergraduate thesis projects,
WAC/LIP courses, availability of teaching assistants to aid faculty teaching large
sections, requirements for laboratories, clinical sections and similar activities, and
many other factors; and
THE PARTIES AGREE that given the complexity of the issues to be
considered to establish a committee made up of four (4) members chosen by
LUFA and four (4) members chosen by the Administration to undertake the
following:
a) Collect comparative data on teaching loads for other Universities for
specific areas.
b) Examine factors that contribute to teaching loads in various areas at
Laurentian with the intention of identifying factors that would lead
to more efficient use of faculty resources.
c) Recommend definitive steps to be taken to modify requirements and
practices that lead to high teaching loads but do not enhance
significantly the quality of programs.
d) Recommend what fraction of the savings entailed by the changes
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 151

should be applied to adjust teaching loads in light of practices at
other universities and whether certain tasks should be
compensated by some form of additional payment.
e) Examine the impact of new internet based technology on teaching
and workload of faculty, including issues related to purchases of
prepackaged courses and their development, as well as support services
and training opportunities for such activities.
THE PARTIES FURTHER AGREE that given the magnitude of the
task, it is expected that the Committee will not wait until there is a final report
covering all areas, but will proceed to recommend implementation of
recommendations covering certain sections as soon as, in the committee's view,
such action is warranted. It is within the committee's mandate to identify priority
areas for examination, however it is understood that the Committee will address
the workload issue in the School of Nursing as a priority item. If actions
recommended by this committee require a Memorandum of Agreement, the
Parties agree to produce such memoranda and if a recommendation requires
action by Senate, the Parties agree to co-sponsor appropriate motions to Senate.
The committee will submit a progress report to the Parties by April 30, 2000 and
every six months thereafter.
DATED AT Sudbury, Ontario this 22ND day of September 1999.
_____________________________ ______________________________
Dr. Anis Farah, for Dr. Hermann Falter, for
Laurentian University Laurentian University of Sudbury
Faculty Association
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 152

APPENDIX J
Letter of Understanding
BETWEEN:
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY ASSOCIATION
AND
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY OF SUDBURY
RE: Guidelines and Procedures to Assure a Safe Working Environment
THE PARTIES AGREE that all employees of the University, faculty,
staff and administrators have the right to carry out their responsibilities in a secure
environment, without being subjected to verbal or physical intimidation or threats
from students or other University employees.
To that end, THE PARTIES AGREE to establish a committee of nine
(9) members drawn from LUFA (3), LUSU (2), LUAPSA (1), the senior
administration (1), students (1) and security staff (1) to undertake the following:
a) a review of existing policies and practices for dealing with
threatening or abusive behaviour;
b) organize public sessions to encourage dissemination of available
information and input into revised policies and procedures;
c) draw up written guidelines and procedures for dealing with such
behaviour.
THE PARTIES FURTHER AGREE to cooperate in this undertaking to
produce new written guidelines by April 1, 2000, for ratification by the Board.
Date at Sudbury, Ontario this 8TH day of September 1999.
_____________________________ ______________________________
Dr. Anis Farah, for Dr. Hermann Falter, for
Laurentian University Laurentian University of Sudbury
Faculty Association
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 153

APPENDIX K
Letter of Understanding
BETWEEN:
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY ASSOCIATION
AND
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY OF SUDBURY
RE: Alternate Stream Workload
THE PARTIES AGREE that within sixty days of the signing of this
agreement, the Dean of Professional Schools, the Director of the School of
Nursing, an alternate stream Member, a LUFA representative, and a Vice-
President, Academic shall report to the Parties on the issue of workload for the
alternate stream.
THE PARTIES FURTHER AGREE that should a mutually acceptable
agreement between the Board and the Association not be reached as a result of
this Committee’s deliberations, the issue of workload for alternate stream
members shall be resolved through arbitration by Mr. Martin Teplitsky at no
cost to the Parties.
Date at Sudbury, Ontario this 11TH day of September 2002.
‘Dr. Anis Farah’ ‘Dr. Hermann Falter’
for for
Laurentian University Laurentian University of Sudbury
Faculty Association
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 154

APPENDIX L
Letter of Understanding
BETWEEN:
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY ASSOCIATION
AND
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY OF SUDBURY
RE: Committee on Long Term Disability
WHEREAS the Parties acknowledge that there is an ongoing need to
address concerns related to Long Term Disability claims.
AND WHEREAS there is currently a working group established by
the Benefits Committee reviewing a number of issues relating to the current
long term disability coverage.
AND WHEREAS the Parties acknowledge the interest of other
employee groups in the outcome of such a review.
THE PARTIES HEREBY AGREE to establish a committee with two
representatives chosen by LUFA and two representatives chosen by the Board
to:
1. Compare the incidence of claims in Laurentian’s LTD program
with that of programs at other Ontario universities and the Sudbury
region.
2. Compare regional incidence of LTD claims with that of other
Ontario regions.
3. Identify possible causes of the apparent high incidence rate of
LTD at Laurentian.
4. Make recommendations to the parties where appropriate.
THE PARTIES FURTHER AGREE that it is not intended that this
Committee duplicate the work of the working group established by the Benefits
Committee but rather that it build upon the data already considered by this
group and expand the scope of the work to concentrate on the causes of the
apparent high incidence rate at Laurentian.
THE PARTIES FURTHER AGREE that the Committee shall report
its findings by March 31 of each year until the Committee concludes that its
work has been completed.
THE PARTIES FURTHER AGREE that in view of the importance
of this review to the interests of other employee groups, the Committee will
seek and encourage input from these groups by offering LUSU to name two
representatives, the Administrative Staff Association to name one
representative to the Committee, and one representative from the Federated
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 155

Universities.
THE PARTIES FURTHER AGREE that for the first year, the
representatives shall be appointed within 30 days of the signing of this
Agreement, or by September 30, whichever comes later, and that in future
years, by September 30.
THE PARTIES FURTHER AGREE that once selected, the members
of the Committee shall select their own chair that shall convene meetings, and
their own vice-chair that shall perform this function in the absence of the chair.
Date at Sudbury, Ontario this 5TH day of September 2002.
‘Dr. Anis Farah’ ‘Dr. Hermann Falter’
for for
Laurentian University Laurentian University of Sudbury
Faculty Association
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 156

APPENDIX M
Letter of Understanding
BETWEEN:
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY ASSOCIATION
AND
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY OF SUDBURY
RE: Criteria for Promotion
RE: CRITERIA FOR PROMOTION
THE PARTIES HEREBY AGREE THAT without prejudice or
precedent and in recognition of the fact that the criteria for promotion have
changed, the following promotions are granted:
Jean-Charles Cachon
Richard Carrière
Ozhand Ganjavi
Léo Leduc
Kathryn Molohon
Gerry Tapper
THE PARTIES FURTHER AGREE THAT all grievances and
harassment claims related to the decision not to affirm the FPC decisions are
withdrawn in writing as a condition of promotion in each individual case.
Date at Sudbury, Ontario this 12TH day of September 2002.
‘Dr. Anis Farah’ ‘Dr. Hermann Falter’
for for
Laurentian University Laurentian University of Sudbury
Faculty Association
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 157

APPENDIX N
Letter of Understanding
BETWEEN:
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY ASSOCIATION
AND
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY OF SUDBURY
RE: Pension and Benefits
THE PARTIES HEREBY AGREE THAT the following changes will
be made to the benefit coverage effective November 1, 2002.
Life Insurance: 3 x annual salary to a maximum of $300,000.
Vision Care Expenses: maximum of $300 every two years.
Dental Plan: payment shall be made in accordance with the current
rate schedule as established by the Ontario Dental Association.
THE PARTIES FURTHER AGREE to implement a supplementary
pension plan for all Members who retire after July 1, 2002 as proposed by the
plan’s actuary in his letter dated February 17, 2000.
Date at Sudbury, Ontario this 11TH day of September 2002.
‘Dr. Anis Farah’ ‘Dr. Hermann Falter’
for for
Laurentian University Laurentian University of Sudbury
Faculty Association
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 158

APPENDIX O
Letter of Understanding
BETWEEN:
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY ASSOCIATION
AND
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY OF SUDBURY
RE: Policies and Procedures
THE PARTIES HEREBY AGREE to produce a complete listing of
University Policies and Procedures within sixty days of the signing of the Collective
Agreement and to provide a copy of this listing to all Members in the form of an
addendum to the Collective Agreement. This listing will identify how Members can
access these policies and procedures.
THE PARTIES FURTHER AGREE that one member of the senior
administration and one member nominated by LUFA will oversee this task.
Date at Sudbury, Ontario this 12TH day of September 2002.
‘Dr. Anis Farah’ ‘Dr. Hermann Falter’
for for
Laurentian University Laurentian University of Sudbury
Faculty Association
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 159

APPENDIX P
Letter of Understanding
BETWEEN:
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY ASSOCIATION
AND
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY OF SUDBURY
RE: Policy Grievance 2002-05
THE PARTIES HEREBY AGREE THAT the Policy Grievance
2002-05 for an alleged failure to pay a share of gross increased revenue
pursuant to Article 1.40 and Article 4.00 is withdrawn.
Date at Sudbury, Ontario this 11TH day of September 2002.
‘Dr. Anis Farah’ ‘Dr. Hermann Falter’
for for
Laurentian University Laurentian University of Sudbury
Faculty Association
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 160

APPENDIX Q
Letter of Understanding
BETWEEN:
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY ASSOCIATION
AND
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY OF SUDBURY
RE: Retirees Health Benefits
THE PARTIES HEREBY AGREE THAT effective July 1, 2002, the
Retirees Health Benefit will be increased to $800 per year for a family and
$400 per year for a single individual.
Date at Sudbury, Ontario this 12TH day of September 2002.
‘Dr. Anis Farah’ ‘Dr. Hermann Falter’
for for
Laurentian University Laurentian University of Sudbury
Faculty Association
Collective Agreement 2002-2005 161

CCOOLLLLEECCTTIIVVEE
AAGGRREEEEMMEENNTT
BETWEEN
THE LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY
FACULTY ASSOCIATION
AND
THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 1

Collective Agreement 2008-11
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
Article 1.10 – Title 1
Article 1.15 – Official Languages 1
Article 1.20 – Purpose of the Collective Agreement 1
Article 1.25 – Objects and Purposes of the University 1
Article 1.30 – Definitions 2
Article 1.35 – Copies 5
RELATIONS BETWEEN THE UNION AND THE
EMPLOYER
Article 2.10 – Recognition of the Employer 6
Article 2.15 – Recognition of the Bargaining Unit 6
Article 2.20 – Employment of Non-Members 6
Article 2.25 – Senior Academic Administrators 7
Article 2.30 – Existing Practices 9
Article 2.35 – Modifications to the Legal Status of the 9
University
Article 2.40 – Rights And Privileges of the Union 9
Article 2.45 – Dues Check Off 11
Article 2.50 – Information 12
Article 2.55 – Correspondence 16
Article 2.60 – Joint Consultative Committee for the 17
Administration of the Collective
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 2

Collective Agreement 2008-11
WORKING CONDITIONS
Article 3.10 – Academic Freedom 19
Article 3.15 – No Discrimination, Harassment or 19
Bullying
Article 3.20 – Working Environment 21
Article 3.25 – Health, Safety and Security 23
Article 3.30 – Bilingualism 23
Article 3.35 – Conflict of Interest 25
SESSIONAL MEMBERS
Article 4.10 – Appointment Provisions for Sessional 27
Members
Article 4.15 – Appointment and Renewal for 27
Sessional Members
Article 4.20 – Permanent Appointments for Sessional 32
Members
Article 4.25 – Workload Provisions for Sessional 34
Members
Article 4.30 – Teaching Rights and Responsibilities 36 for Sessional Members
Article 4.35 – Annual Report for Sessional Members 37
Article 4.40 – Withdrawal of Seniority for Sessional 37
Members
Article 4.45 – Physical and Mental Illness for 39
Sessional Members
Article 4.50 – Family Responsibility for Sessional 39
Members
Article 4.55 – Rates of Pay for Sessional Members 39
Article 4.60 – Physical Education Facilities for 42
Sessional Members
Article 4.65 – Exemption from Tuition Fees for 43
Sessional Members
Article 4.70 – Professional Development 43
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 3

Collective Agreement 2008-11
ACADEMIC CAREER
Article 5.10 – Academic Qualifications Guidelines 44
Article 5.15 – Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of 50
Academics
Article 5.20 – Appointment and Renewal 57
Article 5.25 – Employment Equity 67
Article 5.30 – Aboriginal Equity Initiative 69
Article 5.35 – Newly Hired Members 69
Article 5.40 – Academic Workload 69
Article 5.45 – Annual Report for Members 78
Article 5.50 – Assessment of a Member's 79
Performance
Article 5.55 – Faculty/Francophone Faculty/Library 86
Personnel Committee
Article 5.60 – Tenure Evaluation Procedures 92
Article 5.65 – Promotion Procedures 99
Article 5.70 – Personnel Files 102
Article 5.75 – Disciplinary Measures 105
Article 5.80 – Dismissal Procedures 106
Article 5.85 – Resignation 108
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 4

Collective Agreement 2008-11
RESEARCH, CREATIVITY AND PROFESSIONAL
DEVELOPMENT
Article 6.10 – Research and Creativity 111
Article 6.15 – Research, Creativity and Development 111
Office
Article 6.20 – Research and Development Support 112
Article 6.25 – Laurentian University Research Fund 112
(LURF)
Article 6.30 – Patents 114
Article 6.35 – Copyright 116
Article 6.40 – Committee on Patents and Copyright 119
Article 6.45 – Professional Development 121
Expenditures
LEAVES
Article 7.10 – Recognized and Other Holidays 123
Article 7.15 – Vacation 123
Article 7.20 – Absence General 124
Article 7.25 – Sabbatical Leaves 126
Article 7.30 – Study Leaves 136
Article 7.35 – Voluntary Reduced Workload 139
Article 7.40 – Leaves of Absence Without Pay 142
Article 7.45 – Court Leaves 142
Article 7.50 – Political Leaves 143
Article 7.55 – Physical and Mental Illness 144
Article 7.60 – Pregnancy, Parental and Adoption 149
Leaves
Article 7.65 – Special Leaves 153
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 5

Collective Agreement 2008-11
SALARY AND BENEFITS
Article 8.10 – Salary Structure 155
Article 8.15 – Progress Through the Ranks 158
Increments
Article 8.20 – Procedures for the Award/Denial of a 158
Progress Through the Ranks Increment
Article 8.25 – Merit Increments 161
Article 8.30 – Additional Qualifications Increments 162
Article 8.35 – Overloads 162
Article 8.40 – Distance Education Courses 163
Article 8.45 – Benefits 165
Article 8.50 – Tuition Fee Exemption and Spousal 168
Library Card
Article 8.55 – Moving Expenses 169
Article 8.60 – Physical Education Facilities 170
Article 8.65 – Public Liability Insurance 170
Article 8.70 – Parking 171
Article 8.75 – Reimbursement of Expenses 171
Article 8.80 – Policy and Procedures in the Event of 171
Death
Article 8.85 – Salary to Beneficiary in the Event of 174
Death of Faculty Member
CHAIRS AND DIRECTORS
Article 9.10 – Duties of Chairs/Directors 175
Article 9.15 – Selection of Chairs/Directors 177
Article 9.20 – Term of Office of Chairs/Directors 180
Article 9.25 – Teaching Load Reductions and 180
Stipends for Chairs/Directors
Article 9.30 – Removal from Office of 182
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 6

Collective Agreement 2008-11
REDUNDANCY AND FINANCIAL EXIGENCY
Article 10.10 – Redundancy 184
Article 10.15 – Financial Exigency 191
GRIEVANCE AND ARBITRATION
Article 11.10 – Grievance Procedure 198
Article 11.15 – Arbitration Procedure 201
STRIKES AND LOCKOUTS
Article 12.10 – Strikes and Lockouts 204
VALIDITY, DURATION AND CONTINUANCE OF
THE COLLECTIVE AGREEMENT
Article 13.10 – Validity of the Collective Agreement 205
Article 13.15 – Duration and Continuance of the 205
Collective Agreement
APPENDICES
A-1 OLRB Designation of the Bargaining Unit 207
A-2 1979 OLRB Designation of the Bargaining 209
Unit (For Reference Only)
A-3 1979 OLRB Decision (For Reference Only) 210
A-4 (1) 1994 OLRB Designation of Sessional 215
Bargaining Unit (For Reference Only)
A-4 (2) Memorandum of Agreement Terms and 217
Conditions of Employment for Sessional
(Part-Time) Bargaining Unit (For Reference
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 7

Collective Agreement 2008-11
B Faculty Members Employed by Laurentian 219
University on Campuses Outside of
Sudbury
C Special Voluntary Early Retirement Plan 221
D Phased Retirement 227
E Joint Committee on the Pension Plan 230
F Pension and Benefits 231
G Benefit Program for Retired Employees 233
H Ongoing Review of Benefits Program for 234
Retired Employees
I Joint Committee to Review the Student 235
Course Evaluation
J Joint Committee to Study Apprehension of 236
Bias
K Joint Committee on Coordinators 237
L Asbestos 238
M Building and Planning Committee 239
N Universal Bus Pass 240
O Standard Letter of Appointment 241
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 8

Collective Agreement 2008-11
INTRODUCTION
ARTICLE 1.10 – TITLE
1.10.1 The official title of this Collective Agreement shall be
"The Collective Agreement between the Laurentian
University Faculty Association and the Board of
Governors of Laurentian University". Hereinafter, this title shall be referred to as the Collective Agreement.
ARTICLE 1.15 – OFFICIAL LANGUAGES
1.15.1 Both the English and French versions of the
Collective Agreement shall be official and definitive versions. Both Parties may use either the English or the French
version in any proceedings arising out of the Collective Agreement, and shall apply the version of the Collective
Agreement in which formal grievance/arbitration proceedings were initiated.
1.15.2 The Parties agree to cooperate to have the
Collective Agreement translated within ninety (90) days from the version negotiated at the table into the other official
language of Canada. The Parties will share equally in the cost of the translation.
ARTICLE 1.20 – PURPOSE OF THE COLLECTIVE
AGREEMENT
1.20.1 It is the purpose of this Collective Agreement:
(a) To set forth terms and conditions relating to employment, remuneration and benefits.
(b) To maintain a harmonious relationship between the Union and the Employer by providing amicable means for settling
differences which may arise between them from time to time.
(c) To encourage the efficient and responsible conduct of the life and work of the University.
(d) To foster a working environment which motivates Members to achieve the objects and purposes of the University.
ARTICLE 1.25 – OBJECTS AND PURPOSES OF THE
UNIVERSITY
1.25.1 The objects and purposes of the University, as set out in the Act, are:
(a) The advancement of learning and the dissemination of knowledge; and
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 9

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(b) The intellectual, social, moral and physical development of its members and the betterment of society.
1.25.2 The Parties agree to cooperate in the pursuit of these objects and purposes.
ARTICLE 1.30 – DEFINITIONS
1.30.1 For the purpose of this Collective Agreement the following words shall bear the definition indicated herein except
as otherwise provided in this Collective
Agreement:
(a) Laurentian University of Sudbury Act shall mean the Laurentian University of Sudbury
Act, being Chapter 151 of the Statutes of
Ontario for the year 1960 as amended by
Chapter 154, 1961-62.
(b) University shall mean Laurentian University of
Sudbury.
(c) Employer or Board shall mean the Board of
Governors of Laurentian University, or its designate, as provided for in the Laurentian
University of Sudbury Act.
(d) Union or LUFA shall mean the Laurentian
University Faculty Association, certified to be the exclusive Bargaining Agent for the full- time and Sessional faculty of the
University pursuant to the various relevant decisions of the Ontario Labour Relations Board.
(e) Parties shall mean the Board of Governors of
Laurentian University of Sudbury and the
Laurentian University Faculty Association.
(f) Senate shall mean the Senate of Laurentian
University of Sudbury as constituted in the
Laurentian University of Sudbury Act.
(g) President shall mean the President of
Laurentian University of Sudbury or the
President's designate.
(h) Vice-President, Academic shall mean the
Vice-President, Academic (Anglophone
Affairs) or Vice-President, Academic
(Francophone Affairs) as appropriate or their respective designates.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 10

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(i) Dean shall mean the Dean of a Faculty duly appointed or the Dean's designate.
(j) University Librarian shall mean the officer in charge of the University Library and Archives.
(k) Faculty shall mean any body identified as such by the Senate of Laurentian University of Sudbury, and with the
approval of the
Employer in accordance with the Laurentian
University of Sudbury Act.
(l) Chair/Director shall mean the Chair/Director of any teaching department / professional school / library department.
(m) Member or Employee shall mean a Member of the Bargaining Unit for whom the Union is certified as the exclusive
bargaining agent except where the context requires otherwise.
(n) Full-time faculty Members shall mean academic Employees appointed through tenured, probationary, or limited-term
appointments to perform duties of (a)
Teaching, including supervision / Professional
Librarianship / Archives Management, (b)
Scholarly Activity, and (c) University
Governance and Administrative Duties consistent with Article 5.15 – Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of Academics.
(o) Unless specified in relevant Articles within the
Collective Agreement, the terms Professional
Librarians and professional librarianship shall mean Professional Librarians and Archivists, and professional librarianship
and archival management, respectively.
(p) Sessional Member shall mean a Member hitherto a Member of the Bargaining Unit designated by the March 28, 1994
Ontario
Labour Relations Board Certificate and now a
Member of this Merged Bargaining Unit.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 11

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(q) Adjunct faculty members shall mean those persons outside the university whose scholarly or professional
accomplishments merit association with the university. Adjunct faculty members are appointed for a defined period, with
defined privileges and voluntary responsibilities in scholarly activity. Adjunct appointments do not have ranks or carry the
right to vote in Department/School decision- making.
(r) Academic Year shall mean the twelve (12) month period commencing July 1 and ending
June 30 of any given year and includes the
Fall, Winter, and Spring Terms as per the
University Calendar, even where the Spring
Term extends beyond June 30.
(s) Session shall mean either or both Terms of the Winter Session (from September to
December or from January to April) or the
Spring Session (from April to July) as per the
Laurentian University Calendar.
(t) Course credits shall mean the number of credits assigned to a course by the University
Senate and as indicated in the Laurentian
University Calendar.
(u) Course credits that contribute toward
Sessional Seniority shall mean credits arising from courses for which the Sessional
Lecturer’s name appears on the Laurentian
University course masters, grade reports, teaching evaluations, or letters of appointment and excludes courses offered by
the Centre for Continuing Education, except for non-distance education courses that are offered on a Laurentian campus.
(v) Immediate Family shall mean a spouse, sibling, parent or child whether related by blood, adoption, marriage or
common-law relationship.
(w) Conflict of interest shall mean a situation where an individual stands to benefit from a decision being made with
respect to a person who is a member of the individual’s immediate family, or with whom the individual has any relationship
of an intimate and/or financial and/or commercial nature either current or past, including any student- supervisor
relationship or any other past or present relationship, which conflicts or appears to conflict with the individual’s
responsibility to the University and includes
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 12

Collective Agreement 2008-11 an actual, apparent and/or perceived conflict of interest.
ARTICLE 1.35 – COPIES
1.35.1 The Employer shall, within thirty (30) days after the respective bargaining committees have approved the
translation of the Collective Agreement, provide at no charge, a copy of this Collective Agreement in both official
languages to each Member of the
Union, and upon request to individuals who were employed as Sessional Lecturers during the previous three (3) years.
1.35.2 The Employer shall also issue, at no charge, a copy of the Collective Agreement to each new appointee, whose
appointment falls within the Bargaining Unit, no later than with the offer of appointment.
1.35.3 The cost of producing any additional copies shall be borne by the Party that requests them.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 13

Collective Agreement 2008-11
RELATIONS BETWEEN THE UNION AND THE EMPLOYER
ARTICLE 2.10 – RECOGNITION OF THE EMPLOYER
2.10.1 Composition
Laurentian University of Sudbury is incorporated under the Statutes of the Province of Ontario, 1960,
Chapter 151 as amended by 1961-62, Chapter 154.
2.10.2 Rights
The Union recognises that the Employer has retained and shall possess and exercise all rights and functions, powers,
privileges and authority that the
Employer possessed under the Act of Incorporation prior to the signing of this Collective Agreement with the Union,
excepting only those that are clearly and specifically relinquished or restricted in this Collective
Agreement, or modified by statute. The Employer undertakes that all rights and functions, powers, privileges and authority
shall be exercised in a manner consistent with the provisions of this
Collective Agreement.
ARTICLE 2.15 – RECOGNITION OF THE BARGAINING UNIT
2.15.1 The Employer recognises the Union as the exclusive
Bargaining Agent for the Bargaining Unit(s) defined in the Ontario Labour Relations Board Certificates of
July 9, 1979, March 28,1994, and October 31,1995
(which are attached as appendixes to this
Memorandum of Agreement) and any amendments to these certificates.
ARTICLE 2.20 – EMPLOYMENT OF NON-MEMBERS
2.20.1 The Employer agrees that, except as otherwise provided for in this Article, it will not employ
Non-Members to teach in the programs of/or offer professional library service in the University.
Membership in the Bargaining Unit is defined in
Article 2.15 – Recognition of the Bargaining Unit.
2.20.2 Notwithstanding the generality of clause 2.20.1 above, nothing in this Collective Agreement is intended to prevent
the Employer from assigning a teaching load to individuals that are precluded from membership in the Bargaining Unit by
virtue of their position as described in the Ontario Labour Relations
Board Certificates designated in Article 2.15 –
Recognition of the Bargaining Unit. The Union will exercise reason in entering into Memoranda of
Agreement to allow the assignment of occasional teaching loads to qualified individuals who hold
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 14

Collective Agreement 2008-11 senior administrative posts within the University and whose official functions could
reasonably be deemed to be inconsistent with Union Membership.
2.20.3 As per the Ontario Labour Relations Board
Certificate, Visiting and Exchange professors/librarians may work outside the
Bargaining Unit.
2.20.4 Notwithstanding clause 2.20.3 above, Non-Members of the Bargaining Unit must not participate in decisions by the
Department/School on personnel matters except as specified in this Collective
Agreement.
ARTICLE 2.25 – SENIOR ACADEMIC ADMINISTRATORS
2.25.1 Selection
While retaining the right to appoint Senior Academic
Administrators, including the President, the Employer recognises the usefulness and desirability of consultation with
Members, Units and Divisions in their selection, and shall follow the selection and appointment procedures that have been
approved by the Board of Governors and the Senate. In instances where an outside applicant is being considered for a
senior academic appointment, the applicant will normally be offered an appointment according to their qualifications at a
rank consistent with the criteria listed under Article 5.20 – Appointment and
Renewal.
2.25.2 Removal
The Employer shall consider all serious complaints against Senior Academic Administrators and take appropriate action,
including the possibility of removal from office. It is understood that if a majority of Members of the Bargaining Unit within
the
Administrator's purview indicate dissatisfaction with that Administrator, the University will view this as one example of a
serious complaint.
2.25.3 Re-entry into the Bargaining Unit
(a) Any Senior Academic Administrators, who are excluded from the Bargaining Unit by virtue of their office, shall upon
resignation/retirement/removal from that office or upon being made redundant or in the event of closure of the office return
to take-up
Membership in the Bargaining Unit.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 15

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(b) No Member shall be displaced from the
Department/School by the entry or re-entry of former Senior Academic Administrators. If there is no vacancy in the
Department/School concerned, the additional allocation shall not be at the expense of another
Department/School allocation.
(c) For all purposes relating to this Collective
Agreement, membership in the Bargaining
Unit of a Senior Academic Administrator shall be reckoned as if they had not been outside the Bargaining Unit during their
term of office.
(d) Senior Academic Administrators returning to the Bargaining Unit shall be considered as
Members teaching for the first time (as per paragraph 5.40.8 (d) of Article 5.40 –
Academic Workload) and shall be assigned teaching/professional library loads in keeping with the practice of their
respective
Department/School(s).
2.25.4 Acting or Substitute Senior Academic
Administrators
(a) The University may from time to time appoint members of the Bargaining Unit to act or substitute for short periods of
time in the place of Senior Academic Administrators.
Members so serving shall not undertake or be required to undertake any personnel action.
(b) For longer periods, i.e. two (2) months or more, when there is a need for an appointee to substitute or act with full
authority and responsibility of office, a Member who so acts shall cease to be a Member of the Bargaining
Unit for the period of substituting or acting and shall receive a pro-rated stipend for the position.
2.25.5 Relationship between Senior Academic
Administrators and Departments/Schools.
Senior Academic Administrators shall be considered full Members of Departments/Schools in which they teach/offer
professional library service, except that they must not participate in decisions by the
Department/School on personnel matters.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 16

Collective Agreement 2008-11
ARTICLE 2.30 – EXISTING PRACTICES
2.30.1 Prior to modifying or discontinuing any working conditions not covered by the Collective Agreement but possessed
by all Members of the Bargaining Unit or by a group thereof, the Employer agrees to give notice of such change or
discontinuance to the
Union.
2.30.2 The Union shall be afforded the opportunity to make a representation to the Employer through the Joint
Consultative Committee for the Administration of the
Collective Agreement prior to the implementation of any change as defined in clause 2.30.1 above. After such
representation, the Employer has the right to proceed providing the change or discontinuance is urgent and reasonable.
ARTICLE 2.35 – MODIFICATIONS TO THE LEGAL STATUS
OF THE UNIVERSITY
2.35.1 Amendment to The Act
Any future proposals by the Employer to amend the
Laurentian University of Sudbury Act, 1960 shall be presented to the Legislative Assembly of the
Province of Ontario, after consultation with the Union.
2.35.2 Amalgamation, Consolidation, Merger or
Expansion of The University
(a) In the event of a merger or amalgamation or a transfer of jurisdiction, the provisions of the
Labour Relations Act, 1995 of Ontario shall apply, particularly sections 62 and 63.
(b) This Collective Agreement shall bind the transferees or assignees of the University or of the Union.
ARTICLE 2.40 – RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES OF THE UNION
2.40.1 (a) The Employer agrees to provide the Union with the use of a serviced office, in an academic area of the
University.
(b) The Employer agrees to provide to the Union room L-303 (not including L-305) as a common room for use by
Members, Senior
Administrators and their guests.
2.40.2 The Union shall have access to the internal postal service of the University. Normal practice of charging for
external mail will apply.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 17

Collective Agreement 2008-11
2.40.3 The Employer shall permit the Union to use
University premises as meeting rooms on the same basis as University organisations.
2.40.4 The Employer will allow the Union to use University printing, computer, and audio-visual facilities at the same rate
as University users, subject to availability.
2.40.5 The Employer agrees to continue to extend a monthly account, due when rendered, to which charges incurred by
the Union shall be debited.
2.40.6 The Union may request, prior to May 8 of the preceding academic year, that Members be relieved by the
appropriate Dean/University Librarian of up to twelve (12) credits of a teaching workload, or its equivalent in the case of
the Library, during the course of an academic year. Such requests shall not be unreasonably refused. In any one
academic year no more than thirty-six (36) credits of reductions will be granted in total.
If, on the recommendation of the Dean/University
Librarian concerned in consultation with the
Department/School, a replacement is required to take on the duties of which a Member has been relieved, the Union will
reimburse the Employer for a maximum of one (1) sessional payment for each six
(6) credit equivalent reduction that it has requested based on the rate of pay for Sessional Members without establishment
status as specified in Article
4.55 – Rates of Pay for Sessional Members.
If a replacement is not required, the Union will still reimburse the Employer for a maximum of one (1) sessional payment
for each six (6) credit equivalent reduction that it has requested based on the rate of pay for Sessional Members without
establishment status as specified in Article 4.55 – Rates of Pay for
Sessional Members and, in this case, the funds will be transferred by the Employer to the
Department(s)/School(s) affected by the workload reductions to be used by the Department/School as it deems
appropriate in accordance with generally accepted university policy.
Funds will be transferred by the Union to the
Employer within thirty (30) working days of being informed about the disposition of the funds. If the funds are to cover a
replacement, the name of the instructor, plus the course to be taught, or its equivalent in the case of the library, shall be
supplied to the Union.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 18

Collective Agreement 2008-11
2.40.7 The Union shall have the right at any time to call upon the assistance of representatives of the
Canadian Association of University Teachers and the
Ontario Confederation of University Faculty
Associations. Such representatives and any other duly designated representatives or counsel for the
Union shall have access to Laurentian University premises to consult with Members, Union officials or the Employer.
These representatives designated by the Union shall participate in discussions or negotiations with representatives of the
Employer when their authority has been communicated to the
Employer by the Union.
2.40.8 The President of the Union, or someone designated by the President of the Union, and a second Member
designated by the President of the Union, shall continue to be non-voting members of the Board of
Governors.
2.40.9 The President of the Union, or someone designated by the President of the Union, shall continue to be a
non-voting member of the Finance Committee of the
Board of Governors.
2.40.10 The Employer agrees to continue current practices with respect to release time for Union activities provided these
practices are known and reasonable.
2.40.11 The Union shall maintain its current representation of one (1) member on the University Advisory
Committee on Security Services.
2.40.12 The President of the Union or someone designated by the President, and two (2) additional Members designated
by the President of the Union, shall continue to be voting members of the University
Pension Committee. Given the importance of pensions, on substantive matters, the Union’s
Board has the right to ratify the recommendations of its representatives.
ARTICLE 2.45 – DUES CHECK-OFF
2.45.1 No Member shall be required to join the Union as a condition of employment. Except as hereinafter specified, the
Employer shall deduct once monthly during the term of this Collective Agreement from the salary of each Member of the
Bargaining Unit monthly dues or other assessments for general
Union purposes uniformly and regularly payable by a
Member of the Union authorised in accordance with the Constitution and by-laws of the Union and certified in writing to
the Employer by the Union.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 19

Collective Agreement 2008-11
2.45.2 At the commencement of the Collective Agreement, the Union shall advise the Employer in writing of the amount of
its regular monthly membership dues.
Thereafter the Union shall advise the University in writing of any change in the amount of regular monthly membership
dues, such notice to be given at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of such change. The Union shall limit the
change in membership dues to no more than three (3) times per year.
2.45.3 Except as hereinafter specified, the amounts so deducted shall be remitted to the Union by the fifteenth (15th) of
the month following the month in which the deductions are made together with a list specifying the names of those
Members of the
Bargaining Unit from whose salaries the aforementioned deductions have been made and the individual amount of each
member's deduction. The
Employer shall with the list aforesaid provide the names of all Members who have ceased to be employees of the
University.
2.45.4 The Employer shall deduct from the salary of each
Member of the Bargaining Unit who obtains an order from the Ontario Labour Relations Board under section 47 of the
Labour Relations Act, 1995 of
Ontario (directing that the said Member is not required to pay monthly dues or other assessments to the Union because of
her/his religious conviction or belief) an amount equal to the monthly dues or other assessments for general Union
purposes uniformly and regularly payable by a Member of the
Union and shall remit said amount on behalf of the said Member to the University's Scholarship Funds.
2.45.5 In the event the Union wrongfully receives dues hereunder on account of an employee who is not a
Member of the Union, or if on account of a Member of the Union but in excess of the amount required, the Union agrees
to reimburse or credit the employee as the case may be for the amount so received. The
Union shall indemnify and save harmless the
University against any action arising out of the wrongful deductions of money for Union dues resulting from the Union's
instructions and the refusal of the Union to reimburse the employee, within sixty
(60) days of the lodging of her/his claim.
2.45.6 At the time that Income Tax T4 slips are provided to each Member by the University, the University shall indicate
on the T4 slips or separately in writing to each Member the deductions from her/his salary under this Article.
ARTICLE 2.50 – INFORMATION
2.50.1 The Parties recognise that their mutual goals stated in Article 1.20 – Purpose of the Collective Agreement
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 20

Collective Agreement 2008-11 can only be realised if both Parties have access to necessary information required for
effective collective bargaining and the proper administration of this
Collective Agreement. Both Parties agree to use professional discretion in dealing with this information. This information
shall be provided in hard copy and, where feasible, electronically.
2.50.2 To that end the Employer undertakes to provide the
Union with the following, at the times indicated:
(a) In October and February of each year, an electronic and hard copy list of each full-time
Member of the Bargaining Unit which includes the name, gender, language, department/school, faculty/library, campus,
rank (if applicable), actual salary, nominal salary, whether tenured/permanent, probationary or limited term. For Members
designated as ‘On Leave’, the list shall indicate the type of leave that the Member is on.
(b) In October, February, and May of each year, a list showing the name, salary, establishment status, and courses taught
that contribute to the Sessional Seniority of each Member of the Bargaining Unit who is employed during the current
academic session.
(c) In October of each year a list of all limited term appointments and the reasons for the appointment categorised
according to paragraphs 5.20.10 (a) to (e) of Article 5.20 –
Appointment and Renewal.
(d) In October, February and May of each year a list showing the name, courses taught on overload/professional library
service rendered and amount of money paid to each full-time
Member of the Bargaining Unit during the current academic session.
(e) In October, February and May of each year a list showing the name, courses taught on overload/professional library
service rendered and amount of money paid to each non-member during the current academic session.
(f) In October of each year a list including the names of all full-time Members with course or
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 21

Collective Agreement 2008-11 workload release during the current academic year including the amount and reason for
the release granted.
(g) In October of each year a statement of the number of full-time Members of the
Bargaining Unit that did not expend all of the professional allowance available to them as provided in Article 6.45 –
Professional
Development Expenditures, and the total amount of funds left unexpended as of June
30 of the previous year.
(h) A copy of the letters of appointment of all new full-time Faculty Members who accept employment with the University
subsequent to the signing of this Collective Agreement by both Parties shall be supplied to the Union within fifteen (15)
days of receipt of the said executed letters of appointment.
(i) A copy of the letters of appointment of all
Sessional Lecturers who accept employment with the University subsequent to the ratification of this Collective
Agreement by both Parties. Such letters of appointment shall be supplied to the Union within fifteen (15) days of receipt of
said executed letters of appointment.
(j) A copy of the contracts issued to all full-time
Faculty Members who have been granted sabbatical leave or any other kind of leave.
Such contracts shall be supplied to the Union within fifteen (15) days after acceptance by the Member.
(k) A copy of patent and copyright contracts as per Article 6.30 – Patents and Article 6.35 –
Copyright.
(l) In October of each year, the total salary allocation and median salary for:
(i) Senior administration;
(ii) Part-time employees outside the
Bargaining Unit by
Department/School;
(iii) Any other teaching or research employees outside the Bargaining
Unit;
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 22

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(iv) Library employees outside the
Bargaining Unit.
(m) A copy of the course master and updates to the course master when they become available.
(n) A copy of the University's annual audited financial statements and supporting schedules, following approval of these
by the
Board of Governors.
(o) A copy of employment equity data including the number of women and men applying for each advertised position, the
gender, highest degree and years of experience for each applicant chosen for the interview list. Such information will be
forwarded to the Union by
September 30 of each year.
(p) A copy of advertisements for faculty positions shall be sent to the Union once they have been approved by the Office
of the Vice
President, Academic.
(q) A copy of any mailings forwarded by the
Employer to Members, to be sent to the
Union at the same time as the general mailing.
(r) A copy of all minutes, actuarial reports and benefit reports of the Pension and Benefits
Committees.
(s) Thirty (30) days after the signing of this
Collective Agreement, a copy of all present articulation agreements between the
Employer and all public and private education institutions.
(t) A copy of all new articulation agreements between the Employer and all public and private education institutions within
thirty
(30) days of the signing of the said agreements.
2.50.3 The Union agrees to provide the Employer with:
(a) Copies of any mailings made by the Union to all its Members, to be sent to the Employer at the same time as the
general mailing.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 23

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(b) Copies of any statements or representations made or to be made publicly by the Union.
(c) An up-to-date copy of the constitution of the
Union.
(d) An up-to-date list of the Executive of the
Union.
2.50.4 Each Member, who has not previously done so, shall when requested supply the Personnel Office with one
(1) copy of her/his birth certificate (or other equivalent documentation attesting to the date of birth).
2.50.5 It is understood that this section shall not be construed to require either Party to supply any information that is
confidential with respect to matters relating to labour relations.
2.50.6 Each Party agrees to inform the other Party when statistical information concerning Members is released as
required by law or in response to a request from a government body or agency, and further, to inform the other Party of
the nature of the information requested or released. Except when required by law, the Employer agrees not to release any
individually identifiable statistical data in aggregate form concerning Members to any person, body, agency, and institution
without the written consent of the Union.
2.50.7 One (1) individual shall be chosen by each Party to coordinate the exchange of information and to act as liaison
between the two Parties.
2.50.8 Nothing in this Article is meant to preclude either side of this Collective Agreement from making reasonable
requests for additional information from time to time.
Both Parties agree to fulfil such requests.
ARTICLE 2.55 – CORRESPONDENCE
2.55.1 In conformity with section 113 of the Ontario Labour
Relations Act, 1995, except where otherwise expressly provided in this Collective Agreement, notices required to be given
under the provisions of this Collective Agreement shall be in writing and shall be sufficient either if addressed to the
appropriate recipient and sent by campus mail or Canada Post, or if delivered to the appropriate recipient personally with
a signed receipt required.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 24

Collective Agreement 2008-11
2.55.2 Notices to and official correspondence with the Union shall be addressed to the attention of the President of the
Union or the President of the Union's designate.
2.55.3 Notices to and official correspondence with the
Employer shall be addressed to the Vice-President,
Academic.
ARTICLE 2.60 – JOINT CONSULTATIVE COMMITTEE FOR
THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE COLLECTIVE AGREEMENT
2.60.1 The President of the Union or the President of the
Union's designate and the Vice-President, Academic or the Vice-President, Academic's designate shall act as liaison
between the two Parties as required by this
Collective Agreement as well as coordinate and exchange information as per Article 2.50 –
Information.
2.60.2 When either Party deems it advisable, its representative may be accompanied by one (1) or more advisers.
2.60.3 The Parties are authorised from time to time to enter into Memoranda of Agreement with regard to the
Collective Agreement. The Parties may from time to time authorise other representatives, in addition to the
Vice-President, Academic and the President of the Union, to sign these Memoranda of Agreement.
2.60.4 The Parties agree to form a Joint Consultative
Committee for the Administration of the Collective
Agreement, composed of three (3) representatives of each Party as follows: the President of the Union and the
Vice-President, Academic or their respective designates; one (1) officer of LUFA and one (1) Dean appointed by the
Vice-President, Academic; and one
(1) appointee from each Party.
2.60.5 The Committee shall attempt:
(a) To maintain and develop a spirit of cooperation and mutual respect between the
Parties.
(b) To facilitate better working relationships between the Employer and the Union and its
Members.
(c) To discuss, review, and make recommendations to the Parties on matters of concern to either Party.
2.60.6 The Committee shall meet once in November and once in February and at other times when deemed useful or
necessary by mutual agreement of the
Parties.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 25

Collective Agreement 2008-11
2.60.7 The Committee shall be chaired in alternation by a representative of the Employer and a representative of the
Union. The chair shall be responsible for preparing and distributing the agendas and preparing minutes of meetings.
2.60.8 The Committee shall determine its own procedures subject to the provision that a quorum shall consist of at least
two (2) representatives of each Party.
2.60.9 The Committee shall not have the power to add to or to modify the terms of this Collective Agreement.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 26

Collective Agreement 2008-11
WORKING CONDITIONS
ARTICLE 3.10 – ACADEMIC FREEDOM
3.10.1 In addition to their legal rights as citizens, Members have the right to academic freedom. Academic freedom is the
right to search for truth, knowledge and understanding and to express freely what one believes. The University as an
institution and the community of its scholars have a duty to protect and defend the search for knowledge and truth by all
that enquire, teach, offer professional library service and learn under its auspices. They shall be free to carry out research
and to publish its results, free to teach, to discuss and to criticise both the University and the wider society it serves
subject to the provisions of
Article 3.15 – No Discrimination, Harassment or
Bullying.
3.10.2 Academic freedom entails the obligation to base all research and teaching on a responsible search for truth and
knowledge. It requires the fulfilment of responsibilities to other members of the teaching and learning community. It
requires the acknowledgement of the work of others and the acceptance of responsibility for one's own beliefs and
utterances. Academic freedom does not confer legal immunity.
3.10.3 The Parties agree to safeguard, as far as reasonably possible, the privacy of information, whether on paper or in
electronic form, that is exclusively personal to and in the possession of, individual Members.
ARTICLE 3.15 – NO DISCRIMINATION, HARASSMENT OR
BULLYING
3.15.1 The Employer recognizes the need to provide an environment free from discrimination and harassment, including
bullying. To that end, the
Employer has established a Human Rights Office, headed by a Human Rights Advisor. The Union acknowledges the
Employer’s Policy on a
Respectful Workplace and Learning Environment.
This policy will be used by the Employer in dealing with all incidents of alleged discrimination, harassment, or bullying at
Laurentian University.
3.15.2 The Union shall observe and assist in the implementation of rules adopted to protect employees and the University
Community against discrimination and harassment (including bullying).
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 27

Collective Agreement 2008-11
3.15.3 (a) The Parties agree that there shall be no discrimination, harassment, bullying, interference, restriction or
coercion exercised or practiced with respect to any Member in regard to salaries, rank, appointment, promotion, tenure,
reappointment, dismissal, leaves, benefits, or any other matter arising from this Collective Agreement, by reason of age
(except for retirement as provided for in this Collective Agreement or by legislation), race, language (except where the
lack of language competence would clearly prevent carrying out the required duties), creed, colour, ancestry, ethnic or
cultural background, national origin, political or religious affiliation or belief, sex, sexual orientation, marital status, family
relationship, personal or social life style or behaviour, clerical or lay status, disability (except where the physical, emotional
or mental condition would clearly prevent the carrying out of the required duties).
(b) The Parties agree, however, that no Members or person acting as an officer of the University shall take part in formal
discussions or vote with respect to the determination of any term or condition of employment of a member of her/his
immediate family as defined in Article
1.30 – Definitions.
3.15.4 The choice of the most competent person for the post as described in an advertisement formally approved by the
Vice-President, Academic in consultation with the Department/School will not constitute discrimination.
3.15.5 In the case of the evaluation of applicants for appointment, renewal, tenure and promotion, the criteria adopted
must not systematically discriminate against members of designated groups and shall be periodically reviewed to ensure
that work done predominantly by members of designated groups is not undervalued.
3.15.6 There shall be no discrimination with respect to any
Member arising from membership or activity in the
Union, or from a failure to join or participate in the
Union.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 28

Collective Agreement 2008-11
3.15.7 This Article shall not preclude any action that has as its object the equitable representation of designated
employment equity target groups throughout the academic community.
ARTICLE 3.20 – WORKING ENVIRONMENT
3.20.1 The Employer acknowledges its responsibility to provide and maintain facilities, services and general working
conditions, which support the effective discharge by full-time Members of their responsibilities as specified in Article 5.15 –
Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of Academics. The
Employer will determine by consideration of the financial resources of the University, the manner in which and the level at
which facilities and services are provided to Members. Additionally, the
Employer will provide, in a fair and equitable manner, at least a securable individual office for each full-time Member and
securable group offices for Sessional Members, ergonomically appropriate office furniture, appropriate lighting and
ventilation, and will maintain reasonable levels of working space, secretarial and other support services, including
telephones, computing, printing, duplicating, library services, technical services, teaching and research assistance and
laboratory space if required.
All moving expenses to relocate Members within the
University shall be paid by the Employer.
3.20.2 The Employer acknowledges the importance of providing well-designed, healthy and attractive physical working
spaces and of Members playing a substantive role in decisions affecting their working environment, particularly offices,
classrooms, studios, research and laboratory spaces. To this end, the Parties agree to establish a Joint
Committee on Working Space within ninety (90) days of the signing of the Collective Agreement.
Each Party shall name three (3) members of the
Committee; as well, the Parties shall jointly agree to a Chair who shall be non-voting except in the case of a tie vote.
The purpose of the Committee shall be:
(a) to hear concerns about substandard working spaces and to recommend solutions
(b) to recommend ergonomic standards in offices, through creating model offices and developing design standards
including but not limited to furniture, equipment, lighting, and ventilation; and to continue and ensure
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 29

Collective Agreement 2008-11 implementation of the program for provision of Ergonomic Work Stations as initiated in the
2005-08 Collective Agreement (Article
1.23.2) and as funded according to clause
3.20.3 below
(c) to recommend design standards for any renovation or new construction of offices, classrooms, studios, research and
laboratory spaces
(d) to recommend policies that contribute to the fair and equitable distribution of space and improve the quality of
Laurentian’s working environment.
3.20.3 The Employer shall establish a budget of thirty-five thousand dollars ($35,000) per year, or such other greater sum
as the two Parties may mutually agree during the life of this Collective Agreement for the provision of such furniture, work
stations and equipment according to the recommendations of the Working Space Committee. In addition, funds
unexpended for the Provision of Ergonomic Work
Stations from the thirty-five thousand dollars
($35,000) per year provided over the three (3) years of the 2005-08 Collective Agreement shall continue to be available.
For the purposes of this Article,
“furniture, work stations and equipment” shall be deemed to include, but not to be limited to, chairs, desks, computer
tables, lighting, foot rest, and such computer peripherals as the keyboard, mouse, screen-glare guard, and wrist support
bar, all of a high standard.
3.20.4 On an annual basis all Members, including retirees, upon request, will be supplied with a photo identification library
card at no cost to them except if they require a replacement for a lost card. The charge for replacement will be fifteen
dollars ($15) per card.
3.20.5 In their offices and once every four (4) years,
Members shall be supplied with “a standard computer” as determined by the Computer Allocation
Committee, which shall be networked, attached to a network printer, and maintained without charge to the
Members and Departments/Schools for the full four
(4) years. The Computer Allocation Committee shall consist of two (2) members selected by the Union and two (2)
members selected by the Employer. The
Committee shall also review and update the plan for continued implementation of this policy, including the availability and
maintenance of computers for
Sessional Members, which shall be a minimum of one
(1) standard computer for every group office for
Sessional Members.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 30

Collective Agreement 2008-11
3.20.6 Full-time Members shall be offered a securable individual office located in reasonable proximity to the
Department’s/School’s main office. A Member’s office shall not be entered except by authorized
University staff.
3.20.7 All full-time Members teaching in the School of
Human Kinetics shall be granted free lockers outside the general area and membership service without fee. All Sessional
Members teaching activity courses and experientially based courses in the School of Human Kinetics shall be granted the
same privilege during the session(s) in which they are employed.
ARTICLE 3.25 – HEALTH, SAFETY AND SECURITY
3.25.1 The Employer recognises a responsibility to provide an environment intended to protect the health, safety and
security of employees as they carry out their responsibilities. To that end, the Parties agree that they are bound by the
Occupational Health and
Safety Act R.S.O 1990 as revised and in effect July
1, 2008. The Employer agrees to maintain a Joint
Health and Safety Committee, which will independently consider matters concerning the health and safety of employees
and students. This
Committee shall include two (2) representatives of all unionized groups in the University (including
LUFA), as well as one (1) representative of the
Science/Engineering Safety Committee and one (1)
Employer representative with power to co-opt other members.
The Committee's work will include an examination of procedures and physical facilities brought to its attention, as these
relate to health, safety and security.
3.25.2 The Union shall observe and assist in the implementation of rules adopted to protect the health and safety of
employees and to maintain the security of persons and premises.
3.25.3 Members who have reason to believe that a work situation is likely to endanger them have the right to refuse
unsafe work pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of the Ontario Occupational
Health and Safety Act.
ARTICLE 3.30 – BILINGUALISM
3.30.1 The Universityis committed to the fulfillment of its role as bilingual institution of higher learning, in accordance with
the Laurentian University of
Sudbury Act. The Employer and the Union pledge themselves to the maintenance and promotion of both official
languages, French and English, as well
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 31

Collective Agreement 2008-11 as both cultures.
Notwithstanding the above, the Employer and the
Union acknowledge the distinct role and the important contribution of Aboriginal languages and cultures in particular
programs at Laurentian
University. Further, the Employer and the Union recognize that in the University as a whole
Aboriginal faculty are underrepresented and agree as per Article 5.30 – Aboriginal Equity Initiative to establish an
Aboriginal equity initiative, and to waive the requirement for French/English bilingualism and recognize as bilingualism the
knowledge and/or demonstrated study of an
Aboriginal language and one (1) of the two (2) official languages of Laurentian University.
3.30.2 In accordance with the commitment stated in clause
3.30.1 above, the Employer recognizes the right of all Members to communicate directly (verbally and in writing) in the
official language of their choice with all University Departments, Schools, Research and Administrative services for all
official transactions.
3.30.3 The two Parties shall have the right to be heard in either official language and to require the translation of any
official materials. Members have the right to express themselves in the official language of their choice.
3.30.4 The two Parties agree to make every effort to provide a translation of non-official documents where either Party
requires such.
3.30.5 (a) A Joint Committee of two (2) representatives chosen by the Employer and two (2) representatives chosen by
the Union, distributed equitably between the two (2) official languages, shall prepare the guidelines and requirements for
competency required to enable each Member to meet the bilingualism requirements stated in her/his
Letter of Appointment, in accordance with clause 5.20.8 of Article 5.20 – Appointment and Renewal. The
recommendations of the
Joint Committee shall be approved by the
Employer and the Union. The Joint
Committee shall convene before January 1,
2009 and present its recommendations before July 1, 2009.
(b) The Employer agrees to provide language training at no cost in the course of the entire year at beginner, intermediate
and advanced levels in order to enable Members to a) meet the requirements of bilingualism stated in
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 32

Collective Agreement 2008-11 their Letter of Appointment in accordance with clause 5.20.8 of Article 5.20 –
Appointment and Renewal and b) maintain and improve their skills.
(c) The Employer shall inform all new Members about language requirements for both official languages on an annual
basis until tenure is granted, in order to allow Members to prepare themselves adequately to meet the language
requirements for the granting of tenure.
3.30.6 A Member’s course syllabuses, course notes and presentations (regardless of their format), whether distributed,
projected or transmitted in any and all media, shall be written in the course’s language of instruction. The Member shall
ensure that a terminology index is available to students if certain required readings are not in the language of instruction.
ARTICLE 3.35 – CONFLICT OF INTEREST
3.35.1 No individual shall knowingly participate in any academic or administrative decision, including decisions regarding
commercial contracts or transactions, that benefits the individual, affects or benefits a person from whom the individual
stands to derive a financial benefit or affects or benefits a person in a situation as defined in Article 1.30 –
Definitions.
3.35.2 In the event the affected individual determines that a conflict exists of sufficient seriousness to compromise the
integrity of the decision-making process, the affected individual shall declare the nature and extent of the interest as soon
as possible and no later than the meeting(s) at which the matter is to be considered and the individual in conflict shall:
(a) withdraw from the meeting where the matter is being discussed;
(b) refrain from taking part in any other discussion of the matter; and
(c) refrain from voting on the matter.
In the event there is a disagreement as to whether a conflict of interest exists, the Vice-President,
Academic or her/his designate will decide the matter and the remedy will follow, accordingly. Decisions of the
Vice-President, Academic or her/his designate can be challenged through the grievance procedure.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 33

Collective Agreement 2008-11
3.35.3 The term “individual” in this Article includes Members of the Bargaining Unit and management representatives.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 34

Collective Agreement 2008-11
SESSIONAL MEMBERS
ARTICLE 4.10 – APPOINTMENT PROVISIONS FOR
SESSIONAL MEMBERS
4.10.1 The Parties recognise that the University's mission is best served by a largely full-time faculty and that it is not
generally desirable to make sessional appointments a substitute for full-time faculty.
4.10.2 At the same time, the Parties recognise that sessional faculty add a significant level of diversity, expertise and
practical experience to the University, and their value must be recognised in the governance and decision-making
processes and generally in the on-going life of the University.
4.10.3 Teaching/professional librarianship duties comprise the only assigned function for Sessional Lecturers.
ARTICLE 4.15 – APPOINTMENT AND RENEWAL FOR
SESSIONAL MEMBERS
Appointment of Sessional Members of the Bargaining Unit
4.15.1 Appointments of Sessional Lecturers are made by the Vice-President, Academic or her/his designate on behalf of
the Employer and on the recommendation of the Dean/University Librarian and the Department/School concerned. The
recommendation may be made by the
Department/School as a whole, or by a committee consisting of no fewer than three (3) Members.
4.15.2 Sessional appointments and other extra-departmental assignments of courses shall be made from rosters of
names of potential instructors maintained by the Departments/Schools responsible for the particular course. This will
enable appointments to be made expeditiously and at the same time in a way that honours Sessional
Members' seniority and other rights.
4.15.3 Sessional Members on the University roster shall be notified of the courses expected to be offered in their
Department(s)/School(s) in all sessions of the upcoming year. This shall be done by April 15.
Such notice must specify clearly the course, courses, or type of course to which it applies.
Sessional Members interested in teaching any of the available courses shall send a letter of application to the
Chair/Director of the
Department/School by May 15.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 35

Collective Agreement 2008-11
4.15.4 A letter of application, a current curriculum vitae, a current teaching dossier and any relevant supporting
documentation shall be filed with the
Department/School by the above dates. Notice may be given simply to bring forward a letter of application from previous
sessions, but curriculum vitae and teaching dossiers must be kept up to date.
4.15.5 Sessional Members may have their names added to the rosters after the above dates. In such cases seniority and
other rights shall not be enforceable.
4.15.6 Departments/Schools shall not be precluded from advertising or otherwise soliciting applications to their rosters,
either before or after the above dates.
4.15.7 When courses cannot be made part of full-time
Members’ normal teaching loads they shall be offered by the Department/School in the form of overload appointments or
sessional contracts.
Full-time Members, previous and current Sessional
Members, Retirees, and other qualified applicants may apply for these contracts. In awarding them, the Chair/Director of
the Department/School, in consultation with the appropriate Dean/University
Librarian shall follow the criteria for establishment and seniority listed in clauses 4.15.12 to 4.15.21 below, and for
overloads in paragraph 5.40.6 (b) of
Article 5.40 – Academic Workload.
4.15.8 During October of each year the Employer will circulate to all Departments/Schools, the Union and the Library a list
of courses taught on an overload basis by full-time Members of faculty or by
Sessional Members during the two (2) previous academic years. The list will also be posted on the
Laurentian University Human Resources website.
Departments/Schools will be requested to post these lists on their respective websites. All courses listed will be deemed
to have been posted.
4.15.9 When a Sessional appointment will be required for any other course, an advertisement shall be posted on a bulletin
board by the Department/School with a copy sent to the Union and to the Library. The list will also be posted on the
Laurentian University
Human Resources website and the
Department/School website. The rosters shall remain open until ten (10) working days after the posting on the bulletin
board by the
Department/School. Any outstanding course may
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 36

Collective Agreement 2008-11 be advertised locally.
4.15.10 Full-time Members wishing to teach courses for which Departments/Schools other than their own are responsible
shall be governed by the same procedures and dates as Sessional Members.
Article 5.40 – Academic Workload and Article 8.35 –
Overloads also govern such assignments.
4.15.11 In exceptional circumstances where appointments must be made shortly before, or even after, the
commencement of instruction, and where time does not allow full compliance with the above procedures
(e.g., in cases of illness of a Member originally scheduled to teach; opening of a new section of a course(s); unanticipated
commencements of
Leaves of Absence, etc.) the ten (10) day period referred to above shall be waived, but the Employer undertakes that
reasonable efforts will be made not to violate the appointment rights and seniority protection of Members intended by the
foregoing.
The Employer shall inform the Union of each appointment made under this clause and the circumstances thereof
forthwith. Any individual so appointed shall provide a letter of application and a current curriculum vitae.
Establishment of Sessional Members
4.15.12 Sessional Members shall be deemed to have
Establishment status with respect of a particular course once they have been appointed to teach it for their third (3rd)
academic year. Such sessional contracts need not be in consecutive academic years, but in no case shall exceed the
previous six
(6) academic years.
4.15.13 Retirees shall be deemed to have Establishment status with respect to a particular course either when they have
taught a course for the third (3rd) year on sessional contracts or when they have taught a course as part of their regular
workload twice and have been hired at least once to teach a course on a sessional contract. Such sessional contracts or
teaching need not be in consecutive academic years, but in no case shall exceed the previous six (6) academic years.
4.15.14 The names of Established Sessional Lecturers shall be printed in the departmental faculty listings of the next
edition of the Laurentian University Calendar following a year in which an appointment is held.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 37

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Seniority of Sessional Members
4.15.15 A Sessional Member shall accrue seniority credits with respect to a particular course. For the purposes of this
Article, a distinction is made between courses offered in English and in French, and seniority credits shall accrue
separately for each language version of what would otherwise be considered the same course. Where a course is
replaced by a renamed, renumbered, or revised version of what is essentially the same course, or is replaced by a course
that performs the same function in the Department's/School’s curriculum, seniority status shall apply to such a new
course.
4.15.16 Sessional Members shall accrue seniority credit each time they teach a course. Members teaching a particular
course more than once in an academic year, shall accrue seniority credit each time they teach the course. This shall
include one (1) term courses and shall include the spring session or other extra sessions of that academic year.
4.15.17 Sessional Members with Establishment and with highest seniority shall have first right of reappointment, subject
to notice of those rights with respect to a particular term, as specified above.
Seniority entitlement shall, during the Fall, Winter, and Spring sessions, be limited to one section per term for each course
in which a Member holds seniority. (Such rights are also governed by limitations described in clause 4.25.3 of Article 4.25
– Workload Provisions for Sessional Members.)
4.15.18 Years of Seniority shall be the number of years in which a Member qualifies for seniority dated back to
1984. The onus shall be on the Member to establish her/his years of seniority prior to the above roster dates pertinent to
the relevant session.
Evidence might include, but is not limited to, any of the following in which clear identification is made: letters of
appointment, pay records, University and
Continuing Education calendars, course evaluations, grade sheets, administrative letters referring to the course. When
requested, the
Dean/University Librarian with authority for the course in question shall issue a written statement agreeing to reasonably
established seniority claims.
4.15.19 Seniority shall be retained during academic years in which a Sessional Lecturer is not offered reappointment, but
shall not be increased during those academic years. Seniority shall not however be able to be exercised if the Sessional
Lecturer has not been offered reappointment over three (3)
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 38

Collective Agreement 2008-11 consecutive academic years.
4.15.20 However, Seniority shall not be exercised if a
Sessional Lecturer has removed her/his name from a roster, or has declined an offer of appointment, for a second (2nd)
consecutive academic year.
4.15.21 Notwithstanding the foregoing, Sessional Lecturers may request leave from a roster for up to two (2) consecutive
years for parenting, adoption, full or part-time graduate studies or as per Article 7.40 –
Leaves of Absence Without Pay. Such application shall be made on a one (1) year-at-a-time basis and shall not be
unreasonably refused. In such cases seniority shall accrue in respect of the years of leave.
Written Offer of Appointment of Sessional Members
4.15.22 The Parties agree that Offers of Appointment shall be sent to Sessional Lecturers as soon as possible before
classes commence. Except for situations covered by clause 4.15.11 above, the Employer shall endeavour to mail Offers
of Appointment by the following dates: July 15 for the Fall Term,
November 15 for the Winter Term, and March 15 for the Spring Term.
Each Offer of Appointment shall specify the course number(s), the number of credits, terms and conditions of employment
including salary, benefits, sessional seniority, and cancellation conditions if applicable.
4.15.23 A copy of the current Collective Agreement shall be sent with any offer of employment, except where the
applicant would already have received a copy.
4.15.24 A copy of each accepted Offer of Appointment shall be sent to the Union forthwith.
Grievance of Appointment Decision of Sessional Members
4.15.25 In the event that an unsuccessful applicant for a sessional teaching position believes that someone else was
appointed to the position in violation of the provisions of this Collective Agreement, she/he may request within one (1)
month of the decision a review of the appointment with the view of establishing whether the Employer acted in accordance
with the provisions of this Collective
Agreement when not appointing the unsuccessful applicant.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 39

Collective Agreement 2008-11
4.15.26 Such a request for review shall be directed to the
Dean/University Librarian and/or the Union and shall involve initially an informal stage in which the
Dean/University Librarian and a Grievance Officer appointed by the Union have an opportunity to review the available
information. If agreement cannot be reached at the informal stage, the matter shall be dealt with according to the
grievance procedures set out in Article 11.10 – Grievance
Procedure.
ARTICLE 4.20 – PERMANENT APPOINTMENTS FOR
SESSIONAL MEMBERS
4.20.1 Definition: A Permanent Sessional Lecturer with a continuing appointment who is responsible for undergraduate
teaching / clinical education or supervision / language teaching / skills teaching / coaching / writing assistance and other
related duties as determined by the Employer. Nothing in this definition precludes the Employer from working with the
Boards of the three (3) federated universities to create such a position funded jointly by the partners.
4.20.2 Qualifications: At least a Master’s degree or appropriate professional qualifications and with proven competence in
teaching.
4.20.3 Appointments: Any new Permanent Sessional
Lecturer position must be advertised internally before being advertised externally and must go through the normal hiring
process for the appointment of full-time Members. Sessional
Members with Establishment in at least twelve (12) credits or four (4) three (3) credit courses shall have first consideration
for appointment as Permanent
Sessional Lecturer.
In the event there is no qualified internal applicant as determined by the Department/School, the
University may advertise externally. A Member appointed to a Permanent Sessional Lecturer position without
establishment in at least twelve (12) credits at Laurentian University shall have a probationary status of three (3) years.
The evaluation of an applicant on probation shall follow the normal assessment process for full-time
Members as set out in Article 5.50 – Assessment of a Member’s Performance, but shall be restricted to the teaching
responsibilities.
4.20.4 Workload: The normal maximum teaching workload is twenty-four (24) credits of which a maximum of nine (9) may
be assigned in the Spring Session.
There are no obligations or expectations with respect to research or service but nothing preludes
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 40

Collective Agreement 2008-11 a Permanent Sessional Lecturer from participating in either activity voluntarily.
4.20.5 Transfer to Regular Faculty Ranks A Permanent
Sessional Lecturer may be appointed to a regular faculty position without advertising under the following conditions:
(a) The Vice-President, Academic has authorized a position for the
Department/School.
(b) The Chair/Director of the Department/School has made available an application file for viewing by all Members of the
Department/School and has arranged interviews and open meetings with the candidate and Members in the
Department/School, on campus or through telecommunications technology.
(c) A majority of the full-time Members of the
Department/School by vote have approved of the recommendation, including the term of the appointment where
applicable
4.20.6 The salary of each Permanent Sessional Lecturer on July 1 shall be composed of the base salary of each Member
as of June 30 of that year as modified by the following items:
(a) A scale increase as set in paragraph 8.10.1
(a) of Article 8.10 – Salary Structure for the respective year;
(b) A Progress-Through-The-Ranks increment as set in paragraph 8.10.1 (b) of Article 8.10
– Salary Structure for the respective year;
(c) Catch-up as set in paragraph 8.10.1 (e) of
Article 8.10 – Salary Structure for the respective year;
(d) A merit award shall be awarded according to
Article 8.25 – Merit Increments;
The salary structure for 2008-09, 2009-10 and
2010-11 shall be the floor of Lecturer/General
Librarian as set in Article 8.10 – Salary Structure for the respective year.
4.20.7 Starting Salary and Benefits: Based on qualifications and university teaching experience, starting at the floor of
Lecturer and with increments as set out in Article 8.10 – Salary Structure, plus all regular benefits as per Article 8.45 –
Benefits,
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 41

Collective Agreement 2008-11 vacation as per Article 7.15 – Vacation and working conditions as per Article 3.20 –
Working Conditions.
The starting salary of an applicant with previous teaching experience shall be based on one (1) increment for each year of
full-time equivalent at the university level previously taught. The position shall not contain ranks or promotion. Permanent
Sessional Lecturer shall be entitled to the professional development allowance as per Article
6.45 – Professional Development Expenditures.
4.20.8 Article 3.10 – Academic Freedom, Article 5.75 –
Disciplinary Measures, except clause 5.75.7, and
Article 5.80 – Dismissal Procedures shall apply to
Permanent Sessional Lecturers.
4.20.9 Should a Permanent Sessional Lecturer be declared redundant the Member will be entitled to severance pay equal
to one (1) month of salary for each year of service, with a minimum of three (3) months and up to a maximum of eighteen
(18) months.
4.20.10 The University may appoint a maximum of thirty
(30) Permanent Sessional Lecturers.
4.20.11 The Employer agrees to no further appointments to the Alternate Stream. The remaining Alternate
Stream appointments shall be covered by the terms of the 2005-08 Collective Agreement.
4.20.12 Financial Exigency Article 10.15 – Financial
Exigency shall apply to Permanent Sessional
Lecturers. Within a Department/School, a
Permanent Sessional Lecturer shall not be terminated in preference to a non-tenured Member.
When there are more than one Permanent Sessional
Lecturers in a Department/School, the more senior
Member, in terms of service determined from the date at which permanency at the University became effective shall be
retained unless, after applying the criteria in Article 10.15 – Financial Exigency, there is a clear and substantial reason for
doing otherwise.
ARTICLE 4.25 – WORKLOAD PROVISIONS FOR
SESSIONAL MEMBERS
4.25.1 (a) If, once a contract has been executed, the workload of a Sessional Lecturer must be altered, the agreement of
the Member must be obtained.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 42

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(b) Once a contract has been executed with a
Sessional Lecturer, such a contract shall not be cancelled in order to have the duties performed by a Faculty Member with
a full- time appointment.
(c) Cancellation prior to its commencement of a course for which a contract with a Sessional
Lecturer has been executed can occur only in accordance with cancellation clause provisions contained in the contract.
(d) Cancellation clauses shall be used only where there is good reason to believe that enrolment levels may be
vulnerable. In the event of a cancellation the Employer shall:
(i) Attempt to find work of equivalent value for which the Sessional Member is qualified; and failing this
(ii) Shall pay a cancellation fee of fifteen percent (15%) of the agreed salary as outlined in the Letter of Appointment for
courses taught during the Fall and
Winter Terms; or
(iii) Shall pay a fixed amount of two hundred and fifty dollars ($250) per three (3) credit course, to be stated in the Letter of
Appointment, for courses taught during the Spring Session.
Sessional Lecturers shall accrue Sessional
Seniority for all cancelled courses once they have achieved establishment. Cancelled courses shall not count toward
establishment.
4.25.2 The contracts issued to Sessional Librarians shall identify in reasonable detail the hours during which the work is to
be performed. These hours cannot be changed without the consent of the Member. The librarian pay equivalent shall be
deemed to be (___) hours per course credit of pay (the figure used here to be agreed by the Parties prior to any use of
this provision).
4.25.3 The workload of a Sessional Member shall normally not exceed twelve (12) credits per Fall/Winter session
(September to April) and nine (9) credits per
Spring session (May to August). The credits taught by
Sessional Members in off-campus courses shall not be included in these totals.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 43

Collective Agreement 2008-11
ARTICLE 4.30 – TEACHING RIGHTS AND
RESPONSIBILITIES FOR SESSIONAL MEMBERS
4.30.1 Sessional Lecturers shall be covered by the general provisions regarding teaching and professional librarianship in
clauses 5.15.5 to 5.15.18 of Article
5.15 – Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of
Academics except for specific clauses within this section that clearly apply only to full-time faculty.
4.30.2 The Chair/Director of the Department/School shall structure the procedures required by this responsibility in a
reasonable manner.
4.30.3 The Chair/Director of the Department/School shall make procedures regarding Sessional Members a matter of
record.
4.30.4 In all cases where a personnel action affecting
Sessional Members is required, the action shall be an action of the full Department/School Council, even where general
supervision is delegated to the
Chair/Director, to a coordinator, or to a committee.
4.30.5 Sessional Members shall have the right to attend
Departmental/School meetings. In terms of voting rights, Sessional Members shall have the right of up to two (2) voting
representatives as elected annually by the Sessional Members teaching in the respective Department/School. The
number of sessional voting representatives shall be determined by the number of full-time Members in the
Department/School as follows:
One (1) to Nine (9): One (1) Sessional voting representative
Ten (10) and over: Two (2) Sessional voting representatives
4.30.6 The Dean/University Librarian shall make copies of course evaluations of Sessional Members available to the
Members of the Department/School responsible for the appointment or renewal of
Sessional Members. Student course evaluations shall not be the sole means of determining the quality of the Sessional
Member’s teaching performance.
The Sessional Member’s entire teaching dossier shall be considered.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 44

Collective Agreement 2008-11
ARTICLE 4.35 – ANNUAL REPORT FOR SESSIONAL
MEMBERS
4.35.1 Sessional Members shall submit brief annual reports to their Departments/Schools. These reports shall include a
current curriculum vitae as well as a current teaching dossier as defined in Article 5.50 –
Assessment of a Member’s Performance. At their discretion, Sessional Members may also include material related to their
scholarly or creativity activity, professional development, university governance, outside professional activities, and
service to the community.
4.35.2 Departments/Schools shall make copies of these reports available to the Dean/University Librarian on request.
ARTICLE 4.40 – WITHDRAWAL OF SENIORITY FOR
SESSIONAL MEMBERS
4.40.1 The rights established by the provisions for seniority as described above may be altered or revoked in the event
that the teaching performance of a Sessional
Member is found to be unsatisfactory. Action that may affect the seniority rights of a Sessional Member may be initiated at
the request of the Chair/Director of the Department/School or the Dean/University
Librarian and will normally occur only after an informal investigation establishes reasonable grounds for a formal
procedure. There is an expectation that the Sessional Member will be made aware during the informal stage of an
investigation of the concerns regarding her/his teaching performance and will be given an opportunity to give reasons why
a formal procedure should not be initiated. The
Member will be advised of her/his right to Union representation.
4.40.2 If, after an informal investigation, the Chair/Director of the Department/School and the Dean/University
Librarian are of the view that a formal procedure is warranted, an investigation shall be conducted by the
Departmental/School Council or a specially formed committee that reports back to the Council. The
Union shall be advised that this procedure will be invoked. Department/Schools shall have reasonable flexibility in the
constitution of such a committee. In all cases the investigating body must have at least four (4) members who shall attend
all meetings convened. Membership shall include the
Chair/Director of the Department/School, at least one
(1) other full-time Member of the Department/School, at least one (1) Sessional Member from the
Department/School (if there is one willing to serve), and a nominee of the Sessional Member under investigation (such
nominee must be a full-time or
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 45

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Sessional Member teaching in the
Department/School during the current academic year).
4.40.3 The Member under investigation shall have the right to a full and reasonable statement of the
Department's/School’s reasons for initiating the investigation. The Member shall have the right to examine all evidence
under consideration at least ten
(10) working days before any final determination is made and make counter-representation on it in writing or in person or
both. The Member shall have the right to be accompanied by a colleague.
4.40.4 The investigating committee shall present its findings to the Department/School Council stating the reasons for its
conclusions in reasonable detail. The decision of the Council, which may differ from that of the Committee, shall be
forwarded to the
Dean/University Librarian for action.
4.40.5 The Council's determination may request that the
Member be cautioned or that the Employer's seniority obligation to the Sessional Member be revoked or that the Member
be placed on probation for the duration of one (1) course and that a further determination be made at the conclusion of
that course.
4.40.6 The Dean/University Librarian may accept the recommendation, reject it, or refer it back to the
Department/School for further consideration.
4.40.7 If the Dean/University Librarian decides on revocation of seniority rights, she/he shall advise the
Member and the Union in writing, stating reasons.
The Member shall have the right to request an appeal within ten (10) working days of the receipt of that communication.
The appeal shall be heard by a special FPC/FFPC, which shall consist of the regular
FPC/FFPC, augmented by one (1) Sessional
Lecturer nominated by the Union who will not vote.
The Sessional Lecturer shall have the right to be heard, to be accompanied by a colleague, to examine any evidence with
at least ten (10) days notice and to present counter-representation on it.
The appeal body shall determine the case by simple majority. No further arbitration or appeal shall be open to the Member
or the Employer.
4.40.8 Where an appeal is determined in favour of a
Sessional Member, and where the course has been, or comes to be, scheduled for the following academic
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 46

Collective Agreement 2008-11 year, the Sessional Member, subject to seniority, shall be assigned to, and paid for such a
course or courses. Any other Sessional Member assigned in anticipation of a determination against a Sessional
Member against whom withdrawal of seniority is anticipated shall be entitled to compensation.
4.40.9 Withdrawal of Seniority actions must first be initiated
(as per clause 4.40.1 above) by June 1 in order to be effective for the subsequent academic year.
ARTICLE 4.45 – PHYSICAL AND MENTAL ILLNESS FOR
SESSIONAL MEMBERS
4.45.1 In the event of illness, a Sessional Lecturer shall be granted leave with full pay up to two (2) weeks in each term. If
requested, the Sessional Lecturer shall provide a medical certificate to substantiate the claim. For longer illnesses no
deduction of pay shall be made in cases where no substitute teaching costs accrue to the Employer.
ARTICLE 4.50 – FAMILY RESPONSIBILITY FOR SESSIONAL
MEMBERS
4.50.1 The Ontario Employment Standards Act, 2000 provides specific rights and responsibilities with respect to leaves
related to family responsibilities.
These provisions will apply to Sessional Lecturers.
ARTICLE 4.55 – RATES OF PAY FOR SESSIONAL
MEMBERS
4.55.1 Sessional Lecturers shall be paid as follows for each three (3) credit course which commences after the date
shown below; other courses will be pro- rated as per their credit weighting.
(a) Sessional Members without Establishment
Base Four Four Total pay percent percent rate of
(4%) in (4%) in pay lieu of lieu of vaca- benefits tion
July 1,
2008 $5,288 $212 $212 $5,712
July 1,
2009 $5,595 $224 $224 $6,043
July 1,
2010 $5,875 $235 $235 $6,345
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 47

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(b) Sessional Members with Establishment and
Retirees
Base Four Four Total pay percent percent rate of
(4%) in (4%) in pay lieu of lieu of vaca- benefits tion
July 1,
2008 $5,596 $224 $224 $6,043
July 1,
2009 $5,876 $235 $235 $6,346
July 1,
2010 $6,169 $247 $247 $6,663
Sessional Members are also entitled to the assignment of teaching assistants and/or markers at a level consistent with
assignment of such assistance to full-time Members.
4.55.2 When scheduled Continuing Education Courses may otherwise have to be cancelled, Members may, if they
choose, agree to teach a course for an amount less than the overload stipend. This amount shall be equal to at least the
stipend for the course divided by twelve (12) and multiplied by the number of students enrolled in the course at the time
the course starts. A copy of the agreement shall be sent to the Union at the same time as it is offered to the Member.
4.55.3 The Parties agree that Sessional Members who have establishment for one (1) course, according to Article
4.15 – Appointment and Renewal for Sessional
Members, shall be paid at the establishment rate for any other course they may teach. However, such pay does not
confer establishment for that particular course.
4.55.4 The Parties agree that compensation for Sessional
Members teaching a “teachable” course in the
School of Education or a "didactique" course at l’École des sciences de l’éducation shall be pro-rated at six hundred
dollars ($600) per student up to the maximum of the rate of pay for a Sessional Member with establishment for such a
course.
4.55.5 The Parties agree that the rates of pay for Sessional
Members teaching activity courses in the School of
Human Kinetics shall be the following:
(a) Sessional Members teaching activity courses in the School of Human Kinetics
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 48

Collective Agreement 2008-11 without Establishment
Base Four Four Total pay percent percent rate of
(4%) in (4%) in pay lieu of lieu of vaca- benefits tion
July 1,
2008 $3,100 $124 $124 $3,348
July 1,
2009 $3,200 $128 $128 $3,456
July 1,
2010 $3,300 $132 $132 $3,564
(b) Sessional Members teaching activity courses in the School of Human Kinetics with Establishment
Base Four Four Total pay percent percent rate of
(4%) in (4%) in pay lieu of lieu of vaca- benefits tion
July 1,
2008 $3,300 $132 $132 $3,564
July 1,
2009 $3,400 $136 $136 $3,672
July 1,
2010 $3,500 $140 $140 $3,780
4.55.6 The Parties agree that the rates of pay for Sessional
Members teaching Applied Music courses shall be the following:
(a) Sessional Members teaching Applied Music courses without Establishment
Hourly Four Four Total base per- per- hourly rate cent cent rate of
(4%) in (4%) in pay lieu of lieu of vaca- bene- tion fits
July 1,
2008 $ 52.50 $ 2.10 $ 2.10 $ 56.70
July 1,
2009 $ 55.15 $ 2.21 $ 2.21 $ 59.57
July 1,
2010 $ 57.90 $ 2.32 $ 2.32 $ 62.54
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 49

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(b) Sessional Members teaching Applied Music courses with Establishment
Hourly Four Four Total base per- per- hourly rate cent cent rate of
(4%) in (4%) in pay lieu of lieu of vaca- bene- tion fits
July 1,
2008 $ 55.25 $ 2.21 $ 2.21 $ 59.67
July 1,
2009 $ 58.01 $ 2.32 $ 2.32 $ 62.65
July 1,
2010 $ 60.91 $ 2.44 $ 2.44 $ 65.79
(c) The above rates shall apply to Sessional
Members assigned the duties of sitting on music juries, supervising master classes, and directing ensembles.
Establishment:
On the appointment of a Sessional Member to teach an Applied Music course for a third (3rd) year, the Member shall
have establishment as per Article
4.15 – Appointment and Renewal for Sessional
Members.
Remuneration for Ensemble Directors:
For large ensembles of Laurentian University
(Laurentian University Choir and Laurentian
University Symphonic Wind Ensemble), the total pay will be calculated at three (3) hours per week for twenty-four (24)
weeks based on the above hourly rates.
For all other ensembles, the total pay will be calculated at two (2) hours per week for twenty-four
(24) weeks based on the above hourly rates.
ARTICLE 4.60 – PHYSICAL EDUCATION FACILITIES FOR
SESSIONAL MEMBERS
4.60.1 Sessional Members and their spouse and dependants as defined for full-time Members are eligible for Physical
Education Centre membership and lockerette for the academic year in which they are employed, subject to the payment
of the annual service fee and lockerette rental fee as established by the Division of Physical Education.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 50

Collective Agreement 2008-11
ARTICLE 4.65 – EXEMPTION FROM TUITION FEES FOR
SESSIONAL MEMBERS
4.65.1 Sessional Lecturers shall be entitled to exemption from tuition fees for credit courses taken at
Laurentian University. The exemption available shall equal the number of credits taught by the Sessional
Member. It can be accumulated over a maximum of five (5) years.
ARTICLE 4.70 – PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
EXPENDITURES FOR SESSIONAL MEMBERS
4.70.1 In order to further the objectives of the University, the creation and dissemination of knowledge, the activities of
each Sessional Lecturer shall be supported by professional expenditures. Each
Sessional Lecturer shall receive one hundred and twenty five dollars ($125) for professional development expenditures (in
accordance with
Article 6.45 – Professional Development
Expenditures) for each three (3) credit course taught. Any unused portion of the maximum allowed for professional
development expenditures can be carried forward for two (2) years.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 51

Collective Agreement 2008-11
ACADEMIC CAREER
ARTICLE 5.10 – ACADEMIC QUALIFICATIONS GUIDELINES
5.10.1 For the purpose of this Collective Agreement the following definitions shall apply:
(a) "Doctoral degree" shall mean an earned
Ph.D. or other degree formally recognised as equivalent to an earned Ph.D.
(b) "Relevant experience" shall mean any combination of teaching and scholarly activity as defined in Article 5.15 –
Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of Academics and/or equivalent professional experience.
(c) "Professional designation" shall mean a diploma earned as a result of additional experience/training and qualifying
examinations such as, but not limited to C.A.,
R.I.A., C.G.A., and C.R.E.D.I.F., or others agreed to by the Parties.
(d) When considering librarians, professional service or, where appropriate, library supervision shall be substituted for
"teaching".
In interpreting these guidelines, the following shall apply:
(a) Article 5.10 – Academic Qualifications
Guidelines
(b) Article 5.15 – Rights, Responsibilities and
Duties of Academics
(c) Article 5.50 – Assessment of a Member's
Performance
(d) For those persons appointed prior to July 1,
2002, Article 2.20 of the 1999-2002 Collective
Agreement shall apply.
5.10.2 Academic Qualifications Guidelines for Appointment or
Promotion of Members of the Teaching Faculty.
(a) For the rank of Lecturer
(i) A Master's degree or equivalent degree; or
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 52

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(ii) A Baccalaureate degree and an appropriate professional designation.
(b) For the rank of Assistant Professor
(i) A Doctoral degree; or
(ii) A Master's degree or equivalent and satisfactory performance of the
Member's responsibilities and duties over a five (5) year period as per Article
8.20 – Procedures For the
Award/Denial of a Progress-Through-
The-Ranks Increment and demonstrated evidence of scholarly activity as per Article 5.15 – Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of
Academics; or
(iii) In the Department of Law and Justice, eight (8) years of full-time university education (or the equivalent) during which
time the Member must have obtained a LL.B. and an appropriate
Master’s degree.
(c) For the rank of Associate Professor
(i) A Doctoral degree; and
(ii) Teaching, the quality of which is satisfactory as determined solely by the method of teaching evaluation mandated by
the Collective Agreement; and
(iii) Evidence of scholarly activity (as per
Article 5.15 – Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of Academics) that is of good quality; and
(iv) At the time the promotion to Associate becomes effective, at least five (5) years of full-time teaching and/or research
in a university or an institution of equivalent level or at least five (5) years of professional experience judged to be relevant
for teaching at the university level.
(v) The requirement for scholarly activity as stipulated under (iii) may be replaced in exceptional cases by a consistently
demonstrated quality of teaching and tutorial activity that clearly indicates outstanding qualities as a teacher as
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 53

Collective Agreement 2008-11 established by whatever is the generally accepted method of evaluation.
(d) For the rank of Full Professor
(i) A Doctoral degree; and
(ii) Teaching, the quality of which is satisfactory as determined solely by the method of teaching evaluation mandated by
the Collective Agreement; and
(iii) Shown evidence of scholarly activity
(per Article 5.15 – Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of
Academics) throughout the Member’s career and after her/his promotion to
Associate Professor that ranks as a recognised contribution to the scholarly field or professional activity concerned.
This work must be judged by four (4) external referees, who shall normally be
Full Professors in an academic institution, and at least two (2) of these referees may be nominated by the applicant; and
(iv) Normally, at the time that the promotion to Full Professor becomes effective, at least ten (10) years of full-time
teaching and/or research in a university or in an institution of equivalent level, or has accumulated at least ten (10) years
of professional experience judged to be relevant for teaching at the University level;
Alternative to the requirements for promotion to
Full Professor:
The requirement for scholarly activity stipulated under (iii) may be replaced in extraordinary circumstances by a
requirement that the
Member has consistently shown clearly outstanding qualities as a teacher and has scholarly activity of good quality.
5.10.3 Academic Qualifications Guidelines for Appointment or
Promotion of Professional Librarians and Archivists.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 54

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(a) For the rank of General Librarian or General
Archivist
(i) A Master's degree, in Library or Archival
Studies.
(b) For the rank of Assistant Librarian or Assistant
Archivist
(i) A Doctoral degree, it being understood that unless this Doctoral degree is in the field of Library Science or Archival
Studies, it shall be accompanied by a
Master's degree or equivalent qualifications in Library Science or
Archival Studies; or
(ii) A Master's degree in Library Science or
Archival Studies and professional service and library or archival supervisory skills relevant to academic librarianship or
archival management, the quality of which is established as clearly satisfactory by whatever is the generally accepted
method of evaluation over a period of four (4) years; and demonstrated evidence of scholarly activity as per Article 5.15 –
Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of
Academics.
(c) For the rank of Associate Librarian or
Associate Archivist
(i) An appropriate Doctoral degree, it being understood that unless this
Doctoral degree is in the field of Library
Science or Archival Studies, it shall be accompanied by a Master's degree or equivalent qualifications in Library
Science or Archival Studies; or
In exceptional cases, a Master's degree in Library Science or Archival Studies and professional service and library or
archival supervisory skills relevant to academic librarianship or archival management, the quality of which is established
as clearly satisfactory by whatever is the generally accepted method of evaluation over a period of four (4) years; and
demonstrated evidence of scholarly activity as per
Article 5.15 – Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of Academics since last promotion; and
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 55

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(ii) At the time the promotion to Associate becomes effective, at least five (5) years of full-time professional service
relevant to academic librarianship or archival management.
(d) For the rank of Full Librarian or Full Archivist
(i) An appropriate Doctoral degree, it being understood that unless this
Doctoral degree is in the field of Library
Science or Archival Studies, it shall be accompanied by a Master's degree or equivalent qualifications in Library
Science or Archival Studies; or
In exceptional cases, a Master's degree in Library Science or Archival Studies and professional service and library or
archival supervisory skills relevant to academic librarianship or archival management, the quality of which is established
as clearly satisfactory by whatever is the generally accepted method of evaluation over a period of four (4) years; and
demonstrated evidence of scholarly activity as per
Article 5.15 – Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of Academics since last promotion; and
(ii) Have demonstrated outstanding professional performance and, in addition, have shown evidence of on-going scholarly
activity of good quality (as per Article 5.15 – Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of
Academics) throughout the Member’s career and after her/his promotion to
Associate Librarian or Associate
Archivist. This work must be judged by four (4) external referees, two (2) of whom may be nominated by the applicant;
and
(iii) Have normally accumulated, at the time the promotion to Full Librarian or Full
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 56

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Archivist becomes effective, at least ten
(10) years of full-time professional service relevant to academic librarianship or archival management.
5.10.4 Bilingualism
(a) The Employer may, in consultation with the
Departments/Schools:
(i) Stipulate in advertising for and in appointing Members, that a bilingual applicant is preferred or required;
(ii) Require the appointment of applicants capable of working in either or both of the official languages in order to improve
the balance between courses offered in English and courses offered in French within any
Department/School or Faculty;
(iii) Require the appointment of applicants capable of working in either or both of the official languages in the Library;
(iv) Consider bilingualism as a desired qualification for those Members who are selected to take on specific
responsibilities.
(b) Letters of appointment shall clearly indicate any bilingual requirements which are to be a condition of being granted
tenure and any assistance that the Employer might agree to provide to the Members for them to meet these requirements.
(c) A Member's performance in both French and
English will be taken into consideration in such matters as promotion and tenure.
5.10.5 A Member who has consistently demonstrated clearly outstanding performance in the areas of
teaching/professional librarianship, research, and/or university governance and administrative duties may, in extraordinary
circumstances, be promoted to the next rank without fulfilling the years of experience criterion as stipulated in paragraphs
5.10.2 (b), (c) and
(d) and paragraphs 5.10.3 (b), (c) and (d) above. The burden of proof of outstanding performance rests with the applicant.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 57

Collective Agreement 2008-11
ARTICLE 5.15 – RIGHTS, RESPONSIBILITIES AND DUTIES
OF ACADEMICS
5.15.1 The full-time Members of the Bargaining Unit have rights, duties and responsibilities which derive from their
positions as teachers/professional librarians and scholars working within the University community, and which reflect the
reasonable expectations of the
Members, the University community and the contractual expectations of the Employer. In this
Article, the term Members refers to full-time Members unless otherwise specified.
5.15.2 Members have the right to engage in the following activities:
Priority One –
A) Teaching / Professional Librarianship /
Archives Management
B) Scholarly Activity
Priority Two –
C) University Governance and Administrative
Duties
Priority Three –
D) Outside Professional Activities
E) Service to the Community
Priority Four –
F) Other Paid Activity (consistent with clause
5.15.38)
5.15.3 Members have responsibilities relating to items A), B) and C) and are expected to participate actively in items A),
B) and C), although not necessarily in all three (3) in any one (1) given year. A Member's responsibilities related to item A)
shall consist of those teaching or library duties which are assigned by the
Dean/University Librarian as per Article 5.40 –
Academic Workload. A Member's responsibilities related to items B) and C) are inherent in a Member's status as an
academic and thus flow naturally therefrom. Certain specific duties related to item B) and C) may also be assigned by the
Dean/University
Librarian on an ad hoc basis in order to ensure a good and proper functioning of the University. A Member's
responsibilities relating to item D), E) and F) are
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 58

Collective Agreement 2008-11 undertaken voluntarily by the Member.
5.15.4 Some specific features of academic responsibilities are set out in the following sections:
Priority One –
A) Part One - Teaching
5.15.5 Members have an obligation to develop and maintain their scholarly competence and effectiveness as teachers
within the area of their expertise. They shall inform their students regarding their methods of evaluation, which have been
approved by the
Department/School and the Dean, consistent with
Senate policies. They shall also inform their students regarding their instructional methods and seek approval of the
Department/School and of the Dean for substantial changes in instructional methods involving significant increases in
costs or alterations in the established policy of the Department/School, e.g. conversion of a lecture course to a reading
course.
5.15.6 While it is recognized that whenever possible there shall be adequate consultation with the Member and the
Department/School as to the assignment of teaching duties, once such teaching duties have been assigned in a fair and
equitable manner by the Dean, it is the responsibility of the Member to teach the assigned courses to students registered
in them at the time and place designated by the Dean in a manner which reflects the area of the content of the course
approved by the Department/School consistent with the University calendar. A Member shall not delegate her/his teaching
duties to another person, the occasional guest lecture excepted. Assignment of teaching duties shall be consistent with
Article 5.40 –
Academic Workload. Teaching responsibilities include being available for reasonable consultation with students at their
teaching locale subject to Article 5.40
– Academic Workload.
5.15.7 A Member shall not be required to co-teach a course without the Member’s consent.
5.15.8 Members shall comply with all properly established regulations of the University, which are not at variance with this
Collective Agreement. Members shall accept responsibility for participation in the effective operation of the University,
including responsibilities for academic counselling, registration, and the supervision of examinations as appropriately
assigned
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 59

Collective Agreement 2008-11 by the Department/School, the Dean or the Registrar's office consistent with Senate policy.
During examinations, only the head invigilator shall be a faculty Member. The head invigilator shall be selected randomly
from the LUFA full-time faculty membership and the names of those who serve shall be removed from the pool of potential
head invigilators until all remaining Members have served. The names of those Members not scheduling any of their final
examinations through the Registrar’s Office will not be included in the pool for the examination period concerned.
5.15.9 It is the responsibility of Members to deal ethically and fairly with students and their academic colleagues in relation
to their own teaching. Ethical and fair dealing with students and colleagues includes respecting the
Laurentian Policy on A Respectful Workplace and
Learning Environment. It is also the responsibility of
Members to foster a free exchange of ideas including a discussion of differing views, to avoid discrimination, to respect
the principles of confidentiality in a manner consistent with the performance of their academic role, and to acknowledge
their indebtedness to students and their academic colleagues in relation to their own teaching.
5.15.10 Each Member shall have freedom of discussion.
However, in the exercise of this freedom in the classroom, reasonable restraint shall be used in introducing matters
unrelated to her/his subject or discipline.
5.15.11 Members shall be free to organise and to structure classroom and laboratory activities and to adopt reasonable
means to maintain a learning environment, which is both productive and orderly. They shall have the right to rule on the
use by students of electronic devices such as recording devices, calculating devices, and lap-top computers in the
classroom, laboratory or learning situation. Notwithstanding
Members right to rule, students designated by the
Special Needs Office shall have access to electronic devices as determined by the Special Needs Office.
Members shall be informed of any such authorizations and, if necessary, can consult with the Special Needs
Office for possible alterations.
5.15.12 Members shall not alter or cancel scheduled instruction except with prior permission of the
Chair/Director in any but exceptional circumstances.
Such permission shall not be unreasonably refused.
Both Parties agree that every reasonable effort will be made to notify the students affected. Timetable changes of a
permanent nature require the prior permission of the Dean. Absences are governed by
Article 7.20 – Absence - General.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 60

Collective Agreement 2008-11
5.15.13 Members shall have fourteen (14) calendar days following the final exam to submit their final grades or fourteen
(14) calendar days following the last class for those courses that do not hold final exams.
A) Part Two - Professional Librarianship /
Archives Management
5.15.14 Members have an obligation to develop and to maintain their scholarly competence and effectiveness as
librarians within the area of their expertise.
5.15.15 While it is recognised that whenever possible there shall be adequate consultation between the Member and the
University Librarian as to the assignment of duties, once such duties have been assigned in a fair and equitable manner
by the University Librarian, it is the responsibility of the Members to perform their duties at the time and place designated
by the
University Librarian. Assignment of professional library
/ archives management duties shall be consistent with
Article 5.40 – Academic Workload.
5.15.16 It is the responsibility of Members to deal ethically and fairly with those to whom they render professional service.
Ethical and fair dealing with clients and colleagues includes respecting the Laurentian Policy on A Respectful Workplace
and Learning
Environment. It is also the responsibility of Members to foster a free exchange of ideas, to avoid discrimination, to respect
the principles of confidentiality in a manner consistent with the performance of their academic role, and to acknowledge
their indebtedness to their academic colleagues in relation to their own professional activities.
5.15.17 Members shall have the right and responsibility to adopt reasonable means to maintain an orderly and productive
learning environment in the library / archives.
5.15.18 Members, if involved in scheduled work-related activities, shall not alter or cancel such scheduled activities except
with prior permission of the University
Librarian in any but exceptional circumstances. Such permission shall not be unreasonably refused. Both
Parties agree that every reasonable effort will be made to notify the person affected. Absences are governed by Article
7.20 – Absence - General.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 61

Collective Agreement 2008-11
B) Scholarly Activity
5.15.19 Members shall have the right and responsibility to devote a reasonable proportion of their time to scholarly
activity.
5.15.20 It is understood that for the purposes of this Collective
Agreement the term "scholarly activity" means:
(a) Research directed towards a contribution to knowledge, and the dissemination of its results; and/or
(b) Participation in those academic activities that contribute to the enhancement, creation and dissemination of
knowledge; and/or
(c) Creative and professional activities which contribute to one's discipline.
5.15.21 Scholarly activity may involve, although not necessarily be limited to the following, but in each case the Member
must demonstrate that the activity is of good quality and is consistent with the contribution to knowledge described in
clause 5.15.2 above. It is understood that this list does not imply an order of priority. It is also understood that the
following forms of scholarly activity are not necessarily to be given equal weight and application for each discipline when a
Member is being evaluated for an annual increment, merit increment, tenure or promotion. In such evaluations, where the
evidence does not rest on externally reviewed publications, other evidence of scholarly activity must be considered, but
the burden of proof rests upon the applicant.
(a) The writing or editing and publication of books, textbooks, journals and of articles.
(b) The earning of additional appropriate academic and/or professional qualifications.
(c) Research carried out on research contracts.
(d) The writing of case studies.
(e) The development of teaching/library materials, of an innovative sort which have a wider application than the Member's
own teaching/library activities.
(f) The compilation and publication of scholarly bibliographies, or literary work.
(g) The translation and publication of scholarly or literary work.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 62

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(h) Literary and artistic works, including recordings and public performances.
(i) Demonstrated leadership in the area of professional education, including workshops.
(j) Creative application of existing knowledge through such activities as consulting or workshops.
5.15.22 The Parties agree that scholarly activity does not normally include research directly related to the immediate and
normal preparation for teaching activity.
5.15.23 Where appropriate in their published work, the
Members shall indicate affiliation with the University and acknowledge their indebtedness to students and their academic
colleagues in relation to their own research.
5.15.24 The Parties encourage all Members of the Bargaining
Unit to deposit one (1) signed copy of their published material in the University Library. The University agrees to pay for
reasonable expenses incurred by a
Member in making such material available to the
Library.
5.15.25 Members have the right to participate in the activities of professional or learned societies and the like, providing
such activities do not conflict with the reasonable fulfilment of assigned duties.
Priority Two –
C) University Governance and Administrative
Duties
5.15.26 To the extent consistent with their teaching/library and scholarly responsibilities, Members shall contribute to the
governance of the University through membership on appropriate bodies. It is understood that for the purposes of this
Article, service to the Union will be considered equivalent to service on
Department/School or Senate Committees.
5.15.27 While exercising university governance and administrative responsibilities, Members shall deal ethically with other
university employees and students so that objectivity, fairness, and absence of discrimination are maintained in all
deliberations including assessment of performance of any employee or student. Members shall not infringe on the
academic freedom of academic colleagues or
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 63

Collective Agreement 2008-11 students or breach confidentiality in this regard.
5.15.28 In order to ensure equality of opportunity to participate in university governance, the Employer agrees to circulate
notice of openings on all university bodies above the Department / School / Library level to eligible Members at least two
(2) weeks prior to the time that the vacancies must be filled. As a university body, the Union agrees to circulate notice of
vacancies, at least two (2) weeks prior to the time that these vacancies must be filled.
5.15.29 Because bilingualism is necessary for effective participation in university governance, the Parties agree that for
Members on probationary appointment, formal language training as per Article
3.30 – Bilingualism shall constitute activities of
“University Governance and Administrative Duties” as per this Article.
Priority Three –
D) Outside Professional Activities
5.15.30 The Parties encourage Members to participate in outside professional activities.
5.15.31 The scope and nature of any professional activities of a substantial nature, whether paid or unpaid shall be
reported in writing to the Dean/University Librarian as part of the annual report of Members.
Notwithstanding the above, contractual activities that would involve Members spending a total of more than one half (1/2)
day a week on a regular basis between
Monday and Friday during a term in which they teach or perform professional library duties shall be reported in writing to
the Dean/University Librarian prior to the signing of the contract or beginning of the work. The
Dean/University Librarian may require the Members not to undertake an activity or to moderate such an activity on the
grounds that the time involved would or does interfere with the Member's academic obligations as defined in this
Collective Agreement. A reasonable period of time shall be allowed for the Members to comply. The appropriateness of
the decisions of the
Dean/University Librarian on these matters is subject to grievance and arbitration.
5.15.32 When undertaking outside professional activities,
Members retain the rights and responsibilities associated with academic freedom.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 64

Collective Agreement 2008-11
5.15.33 When a Member's outside professional activities involve the use of the University's facilities, supplies or services,
permission for their use shall be approved in writing or through email by the appropriate University
Administrator. Such permission shall not be unreasonably refused. These services shall normally be paid for at the
prevailing internal University user rate, unless the University Administrator agrees in writing to waive all or part of the
fee(s).
E) Service to the Community
5.15.34 The Parties encourage Members to offer service to the community.
5.15.35 The rights and responsibilities of Members who offer service to the community shall be the same as for those
Members who participate in outside professional activities, as modified by clause 5.15.36 below.
5.15.36 When a Member's service to the community involves the use of the University's facilities, supplies or services,
permission for their use shall be approved in writing or through email by the appropriate University
Administrator. Such permission shall not be unreasonably refused. These services shall normally be paid for at the
prevailing external University user rate, unless the University Administrator agrees in writing to waive all or part of the
fee(s).
Priority Four –
F) Other Paid Activity
5.15.37 Faculty Members have the right to engage in other paid activity
5.15.38 All such activities shall be governed by clause 5.15.31 above, except the annual report where such reporting shall
be optional to the Member.
ARTICLE 5.20 – APPOINTMENT AND RENEWAL
Appointment of Full-time Members of the Bargaining Unit–
5.20.1 New appointments that fall within the Bargaining Unit shall normally be advertised:
(a) Within the University and
(b) Outside the University
In suitable national and discipline publications such as University Affairs, CAUT Bulletin and other publications that may
be especially directed to
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 65

Collective Agreement 2008-11 professionals who belong to any of the four (4) designated employment equity groups.
Advertisements shall contain a clause stating that
Laurentian University is committed to employment equity.
5.20.2 (a) Appointments shall be made by the Vice-
President, Academic on behalf of the
Employer and on the recommendation of the
Dean/University Librarian and the written recommendation of the majority of the
Members of the Department/School concerned after scheduled, minuted meeting(s) with Department/School Members.
Individual Members may choose to vote in person, by email or by facsimile. Proxy voting is not permitted.
(b) The letter of appointment shall indicate the
Department/School to which the Member will be assigned.
(c) In the event that an appointee has duties and responsibilities in more than one
Department/School or program, then one
Department/School shall be declared to be the
Member's Department/School. Wherever in this Collective Agreement recommendations or evaluations of a Member's
performance are required from a Department/School, in addition to the recommendation or evaluation from the assigned
Department/School, the other
Department(s)/School(s) or program(s) shall also submit their recommendation or evaluation; these recommendations
shall carry a weight approximately proportional to the duties and responsibilities of the Member in each
program/Department/School.
(d) Advertisements for all vacant positions shall refer to the Union website where applicants can access the Collective
Agreement.
5.20.3 If a number of applicants have been judged to be substantially equal in qualifications and appropriateness of
academic specialization, priority shall be given to Canadian citizens, permanent residents, and persons on minister's
permits.
5.20.4 (a) Where selection has to take place among equally qualified applicants, relevant criteria for appointment shall
include teaching/professional, scholarly potential and employment equity goals.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 66

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(b) In disciplines where it is difficult to attract qualified faculty, and/or in order to achieve employment equity goals, the
Employer and the Union will work together to devise and implement innovative appointment arrangements in order to
combine appointments with the opportunity to complete Doctoral degrees.
(c) All Department/School search committees for new faculty appointments shall include at least one (1) woman. Where
the
Department/School has no women Members, the Dean/University Librarian, in consultation with the Department/School,
shall appoint a woman Member from another
Department/School to the search committee.
(d) Search committees shall be proactive in the recruitment of applicants from the four (4) employment equity groups
outlined in Article
5.25 – Employment Equity. If the tentative short list of applicants does not include at least one (1) member of an equity
group, the search committee shall submit an explanation. If the
Dean/University Librarian is not satisfied with the explanation, the Dean/University Librarian may change the short list. If
the short list contains fewer than three (3) names, this change can only be an additional name.
Alternatively, the Dean/University Librarian shall work together with the
Department/School to substitute one (1) of the short-listed names.
5.20.5 Appointments shall be made only to the ranks referred to in this Collective Agreement, viz, Lecturer,
Assistant Professor, Associate Professor, Full
Professor, and the corresponding library ranks
(General Librarian/Archivist, Assistant
Librarian/Archivist, Associate Librarian/Archivist, Full
Librarian/Archivist).
5.20.6 Appointments shall be made only to the status categories referred to in this Collective Agreement, viz, limited term,
probationary and tenured. From time to time the Parties may agree to other categories.
5.20.7 Candidates from within the Bargaining Unit shall be entitled to consideration for all advertised posts.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 67

Collective Agreement 2008-11
5.20.8 All letters of appointment shall normally be signed no later than the start of a teaching term in which a
Member must first teach, i.e. by September 1, January
1 and May 1. Letters of appointment shall follow the format outlined in Appendix O – Standard Letter of
Employment and Offer of Employment. No letter of appointment shall contain any conditions not consistent with this
Collective Agreement. A copy of the letter of appointment, or revisions thereof, shall be forwarded to the Union at the
same time as the original is sent to the applicant. The applicant’s telephone/fax numbers and email address, as well as
any other means of contacting the applicant will be included if the applicant has provided them.
5.20.9 Upon appointment new Members shall provide the
Vice-President, Academic copies of their birth certificate, or equivalent document, and certified copies of their academic
degrees and, if required for the position, their professional qualifications.
Limited Term Appointments –
5.20.10 Limited Term appointments are appointments that carry no implication of renewal or continuation beyond the
stated term and no implication that the appointee shall be considered for tenure. Limited term appointees must be
assigned to an academic
Department/School and shall be considered
Members unless excluded by Article 2.15 –
Recognition of the Bargaining Unit. Limited term appointments are utilised:
(a) To bring distinguished visitors to the
University.
(b) For exchange appointments.
(c) To provide replacements for Members on leave.
(d) To respond to specific academic needs which the Employer, for academic and/or budgetary reasons, does not wish to
result in an appointment in the probationary stream. This shall be done in consultation with the Union who shall not
unreasonably withhold its agreement.
(e) For appointments to programs with provisional funding or of a trial nature.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 68

Collective Agreement 2008-11
5.20.11 Where appointments must be made urgently, the
Vice-President, Academic may, with the agreement of the Parties, authorise exceptions to the procedures in clauses
5.20.1 and 5.20.4 above.
Such agreement shall not be unreasonably withheld.
5.20.12 The Vice-President, Academic has the discretion, after consultation with the Department/School and the
Dean/University Librarian, to re-appoint the holder of a term appointment without further advertisement. Should the
Employer choose to re- advertise the post, the incumbent may apply, but retains no right of preference over other
acceptable applicants. The normal procedures for appointment will apply.
5.20.13 Term appointees may not apply for promotion in the final year of their term appointment, unless they had been
prevented from applying in the year immediately preceding. A term appointee reappointed to a further term appointment
or a term appointee reappointed to a probationary position shall be reappointed to the same rank that she/he held in the
previous appointment. A Member so reappointed may, subsequent to reappointment, also apply for a promotion as per
Article 5.65 – Promotion
Procedures. If the Member is granted a promotion, the said promotion shall be retroactive to the date of the Member's
reappointment.
5.20.14 Term appointments shall be limited to a total of three
(3) years, except by agreement of the Parties. In cases where the limited term appointment is a replacement for an
academic administrator, the appointment may be for a term up to five (5) years.
The initial term may be for less than a full academic year, but reappointment shall normally be for a full twelve (12) month
period. The term limits (three (3) or five (5)) shall apply whether or not the term appointments are consecutive or
intermittent.
5.20.15 Non-renewal of term appointments shall not be subject to grievance.
5.20.16 For the duration of this Collective Agreement, the
Employer agrees that the total number of limited term appointments will not exceed fifteen percent
(15%) of the total number of faculty members except with the agreement of the Parties.
Probationary Appointments/Tenure Appointments –
5.20.17 Probationary appointments are defined as appointments lasting up to a maximum of five (5) years, during which
time the Employer and the
Employee are afforded an opportunity for mutual appraisal.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 69

Collective Agreement 2008-11
5.20.18 Probation does not imply that the Employer will grant tenure at the end of the probationary period; it does imply
that the Employer will give serious consideration to awarding tenure.
5.20.19 Should a Member holding a term appointment wish to apply for a probationary appointment, the
Member's application shall be considered in the normal way along with all other applications for the position. Should such
a Member be appointed to the probationary position, at the Member’s discretion, the
Member’s probationary period may be reduced by up to the number of years that the Member has served in limited term
appointment(s) to a maximum of three
(3) years.
5.20.20 Faculty appointed on probation will serve a maximum probationary period based on the academic rank at which
the appointment is made.
Faculty appointed at the rank of Lecturer/General
Librarian or Assistant Professor/Librarian will serve a five (5) year probationary period. Faculty appointed at the rank of
Associate Professor/Librarian and Full
Professor/Librarian will serve a three (3) year probationary period. Where a Member is appointed at the rank of Full
Professor/Librarian the Employer may grant tenure on appointment. Under exceptional circumstances and upon
recommendation of both the Department/School and the Vice-President,
Academic, where a Member is appointed at the rank of Associate Professor/Librarian the University may grant tenure on
appointment, provided that the new
Member is tenured at another recognised university.
5.20.21 An Associate Professor/Librarian or Full
Professor/Librarian who has at least three (3) years service to the University, who has applied for a probationary
appointment, shall be considered for such an appointment on the basis of the criteria listed in Article 5.60 – Tenure
Evaluation
Procedures. Should such a Member be appointed to the position, it shall be a final probationary appointment of one (1)
year with tenure evaluation to begin by September 30 of that year.
5.20.22 In the case of persons appointed at the rank of
Lecturer/General Librarian and Assistant
Professor/Librarian, the initial probationary appointment shall be for a period of three (3) years.
(a) In their initial letter of appointment by the
Vice-President, Academic and in their annual evaluation letters by the Deans/University
Librarian, all Members on initial probationary contract shall be notified that they shall begin to undergo a renewal
evaluation by the
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 70

Collective Agreement 2008-11
FPC/FFPC/LPC no later than September 30 of the final year in their initial probationary contract.
(b) Subject to satisfactory performance as outlined in paragraph 5.20.22 (c) below, the initial probationary appointment will
be followed by a further two (2) year probationary appointment with a tenure evaluation to take place in the final year of
that second appointment or as per Article 5.60 – Tenure
Evaluation Procedures.
(c) The decision whether or not to offer a second two (2) year probationary appointment shall be reached on the basis of a
judgement of satisfactory performance under procedures set out under Article 5.45 – Annual Report for
Members, Article 5.60 – Tenure Evaluation
Procedures and Article 8.20 – Procedures for the Award/Denial for a Progress-Through-the-
Ranks Increment;
(d) In assessing the applicant’s progress toward meeting the requirements for tenure outlined in paragraphs 5.60.3 (d)
and (e) of Article
5.60 – Tenure Evaluation Procedures, the
FPC/FFPC/LPC shall comment on each aspect of these criteria. The FPC/FFPC/LPC should also comment on the rate of
progress shown during the initial probationary period. If the performance is found unsatisfactory the
FPC/FFPC/LPC may recommend that the applicant not be offered a final probationary appointment.
5.20.23 In the case of persons appointed at the rank of
Associate Professor/Librarian and Full
Professor/Librarian, the initial appointment shall be a three (3) year probationary appointment with a tenure evaluation to
take place in the final year of the appointment, except as modified in clause 5.20.20 above.
5.20.24 The tenure evaluation is to be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in Article
5.60 – Tenure Evaluation Procedures, and will result in a decision either to award tenure or to allow the appointment to
lapse.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 71

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Adjunct Appointments –
5.20.25 When it is appropriate for scholarly or professional reasons, a person may be appointed to a position as
Adjunct Professor by the Vice-President, Academic upon recommendation by Departments/Schools and
Deans for a period with defined privileges and voluntary responsibilities in scholarly activity. Each month at Senate, the
Vice-President, Academic shall table as a separate Information item a list of any newly appointed Adjunct faculty
members including their names, Department/School affiliations, periods of appointment along with a justification for each
appointment, highest degree held, year obtained, current institution and rank (position), at that institution. All Adjunct
faculty members shall also be included in the faculty listing on Department/School websites.
5.20.26 Adjunct appointments shall also become Sessional
Members if they carry any of the duties consistent with this Collective Agreement. Such Members shall be paid for thesis
supervision as per Article 5.40 –
Academic Workload. However, Adjunct faculty members may collaborate in scholarly activities with
Members without becoming Sessional Members.
5.20.27 There shall be no new appointments to the currently designated Affiliate Professor category. Professors currently
designated as Affiliate Professors are eligible to be transferred to the Adjunct status at the expiry of their current term of
appointment.
Cross Appointments –
5.20.28 When it is appropriate for academic teaching/scholarly or professional reasons, Members may be appointed to
more than one (1)
Department/School of the University such that the salary of the Member is charged to one (1) fiscal
Department/School, but she/he is named to another
Department/School in which she/he has a sustained academic teaching/scholarly or professional interest.
Such appointments shall be called cross appointments.
5.20.29 A cross appointment shall only be made with the consent of the Members of all Departments/Schools concerned.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 72

Collective Agreement 2008-11
5.20.30 A cross appointment shall be made by the Employer for a fixed period not exceeding five (5) years, and may be
renewed or altered with the consent of the
Member and on the recommendations of the
Department(s)/School(s) concerned. The termination or alteration of a cross appointment, except for cause, shall not in
itself jeopardize the Member's appointment with the University in the
Department/School of primary responsibility, as specified in clause 5.20.33 below. Notwithstanding any of the foregoing, a
cross appointment will terminate upon the termination of the appointment in the Department/School of primary
responsibility as specified in clause 5.20.33 below.
5.20.31 The sources and level of administrative and academic teaching/scholarly support available to the
Member with a cross appointment shall be mutually agreed by the Member and the Department/School concerned and
shall be confirmed in writing by the
Chair/Director. In the event that the cross-appointed
Member is recommended by either
Department/School to teach in the
Department/School to which she/he has been cross appointed, the teaching assignment will be issued by the primary
Dean of the Member and only with the agreement of the other Dean (if applicable) and after consultation with both
Chair(s)/Director(s).
5.20.32 In the case of a cross appointment, the assessment procedures and criteria to be used by the cross- appointed
Department/School in considering the
Member for renewal, tenure and promotion shall be those of the Department/School of primary responsibility as specified
in paragraphs 5.50.6 (b),
5.50.6 (c), 5.50.6 (d), 5.50.6(e), 5.50.6 (f), 5.50.6 (g) and 5.50.6 (i) of Article 5.50 – Assessment of a
Member’s Performance only and are subject to clause 5.20.33 below.
5.20.33 The Chair/Director and the eligible Members of the cross-appointed Departments/Schools shall be consulted
formally during the renewal, tenure and promotion process. This consultation shall not involve examination of the
academic dossier but shall be limited to a written assessment concerning the contributions the applicant has made to the
cross-appointed Department/School in the areas outlined in Article 5.15 – Rights, Responsibilities and
Duties of Academics and shall be weighed by the
FPC/FFPC/LPC pursuant to paragraph 5.50.6 (k) of
Article 5.50 – Assessment of a Member’s
Performance. Members who are eligible to vote and participate in the assessment of applications shall do so in their own
Department/School of primary responsibility. In cases where an eligible Member of the applicants cross-appointed
Department/School acts as an assessor in the applicant’s
Department/School of primary responsibility pursuant
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 73

Collective Agreement 2008-11 to paragraph 5.50.6 (j) of Article 5.50 – Assessment of a Member’s Performance, the
eligible Member shall not be permitted to vote or participate in the assessment of the applicant by the applicant’s cross-
appointed Department/School given that in no case shall an eligible Member be permitted to vote and participate in the
assessment in more than one instance.
5.20.34 The letter of cross appointment shall state the privileges and sharing, if any, of duties and responsibilities between
or among
Departments/Schools.
5.20.35 Members holding a cross appointment shall be eligible to attend meetings of all
Departments/Schools to which they are appointed, but may vote, be elected to or appointed to committees only in their
Academic
Department/School of primary responsibility.
5.20.36 Qualified persons from the Northern Ontario School of Medicine may be cross-appointed to
Departments/Schools within Laurentian University subject to the approval of the Department/School.
Such persons shall be Members of the Union if they carry any of the duties consistent with this Collective
Agreement. Such Members shall be paid for thesis supervision according to Article 5.40 – Academic
Workload.
Spousal Hiring Appointments –
5.20.37 When an applicant has been recommended by a
Department/School for a probationary or tenured appointment and has a spouse or partner who may be qualified for an
academic position, a
Department/School appropriate to the discipline of the spouse or partner may recommend a one (1) to three (3) year term
appointment without advertising under the following conditions:
(a) The Vice-President, Academic has confirmed the availability of a position within the
Department/School in question;
(b) The Chair/Director has made available an application file for viewing by all Members of that Department/School and
has arranged interviews and open meetings with the applicant and the Members in the
Department/School, on campus or through
Telecommunications Technology;
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 74

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(c) A majority of the full-time Members of the
Department/School by vote have approved of the recommendation, including the term of the appointment when
applicable;
(d) The appointment has been approved by the
Vice President, Academic after review of the application file and the Department/School recommendation;
(e) The decision of the Vice-President, Academic is not subject to grievance.
5.20.38 Notwithstanding the provisions of clause 5.20.14 above, an appointment made under the provisions may be
extended, subject to Department/School approval, for a period of up to five (5) years in total.
5.20.39 At any time, the total number of spousal appointments shall not exceed ten (10).
Appointments and Accreditations to the Faculty of
Graduate Studies –
5.20.40 All Members with a PhD or equivalent qualification are eligible to teach graduate courses or conjoint
graduate-senior undergraduate courses. However, to supervise graduate theses Members must be appointed to the
Faculty of Graduate Studies.
Members may apply at any time to the Dean of
Graduate Studies for appointment to the Faculty of
Graduate Studies. The requirements for appointment shall be publicly available to all
Members. All applications for appointment will be evaluated in accordance with the Policy of the
Council of the Faculty of Graduate Studies.
ARTICLE 5.25 – EMPLOYMENT EQUITY
5.25.1 The Parties support the principle of employment equity as defined by Provincial and Federal Laws and the
Senate/Board of Governors approved Policy on
Employment Equity.
5.25.2 Employment Equity
(a) The Parties pledge themselves to work to increase the proportion of faculty Members who are members of the four (4)
designated employment equity groups (women, native people, persons with disabilities and members of visible minorities)
to an equitable level in each discipline.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 75

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(b) To determine an equitable proportion of members of the four (4) designated employment equity groups for each
discipline, the Parties shall consider among other factors the number of Doctoral applicants in Canadian universities as
revealed by Statistics Canada data.
5.25.3 The Vice-President, Academic shall support employment equity by:
(a) promoting awareness of the University’s commitment to non-discrimination and to the promotion of equity in the
employment status of Members in the designated employment equity groups;
(b) ensuring proper training on equitable employment practices for all
Departments/Schools hiring new members;
(c) providing annual reports to the Employer and the Union on:
(i) the total number of applicants and the number of self-identified applicants by employment equity group for each vacant
position for which a search has been conducted,
(ii) the composition by employment equity group of the Members in each
Department/School, by rank and status of appointment, as voluntarily reported by Members,
(iii) the percentage of employment equity groups by discipline in graduate degree programs in Canada, if available,
(iv) other matters deemed necessary to monitor the effectiveness of this
Article.
5.25.4 In order to increase awareness of the University’s employment equity goals and to support non- discriminatory
interview and hiring practices, full-time
Members shall make every reasonable effort to attend the training sessions on equitable employment practices offered by
the University for their respective Department/School.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 76

Collective Agreement 2008-11
ARTICLE 5.30 – ABORIGINAL EQUITY INITIATIVE
5.30.1 Following from the 2007 Report of the Aboriginal
Equity Initiative Committee mandated by the 2005-08
Collective Agreement, the Employer and the Union agree that a series of active measures are required to appoint a larger
number of qualified Aboriginal professors and librarians at Laurentian University, particularly outside Aboriginal-specific
programs.
5.30.2 The Employer agrees to develop a “grow-our-own” program to recruit and appoint Aboriginal professors and
librarians to probationary appointments, who, on the condition of agreeing to work at Laurentian as professors/librarians
for a minimum of three (3) years, shall be supported in completing the academic qualifications needed for tenure (per
Article 5.10 – Academic Qualifications Guidelines).
The details of the program are to be agreed to by the
Employer and the Union in consultation with the
Office of Academic Native Affairs. Each September, the Employer shall canvas Departments/Schools with upcoming
probationary appointment vacancies, and assuming the Department’s/School’s agreement to participate in this program,
shall make every reasonable effort to appoint at least two (2)
Aboriginal candidates under the program every year beginning July 1, 2009.
ARTICLE 5.35 – NEWLY HIRED MEMBERS
5.35.1 In the year the Collective Agreement is being negotiated, all new hires whose appointments are effective July 1 or
before the signing of a new
Collective Agreement shall receive all increases in salary for that year that become effective July 1, except for the PTR
increment, merit increment, or any other increase explicitly excluded by the new
Collective Agreement, irrespective of the actual date of commencement of employment.
ARTICLE 5.40 – ACADEMIC WORKLOAD
5.40.1 The academic workload shall be assigned in a fair and equitable manner. To help ensure this goal, each Member
of a Department/School shall receive a copy of the Chair's/Director’s recommendations to the Dean/University Librarian
on the Member's own workload and a summary of the recommendations on all other Members in the Department/School,
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 77

Collective Agreement 2008-11 including any recommendations for overloads, prior to the recommendations being
forwarded to the
Dean/University Librarian. Each Member shall receive by June 15 a copy of the Dean's/University
Librarian's decision on these recommendations.
5.40.2 The academic workload of a full-time Member during the academic year includes: (a) teaching/professional
librarianship/archives management, including the supervision of graduate and undergraduate students; (b) scholarly
activity, including commitments to external granting agencies; (c) University governance, administrative duties, and other
contributions to the University. The normal guideline for the distribution of the workload among the three (3) main
workload components is: forty percent (40%) teaching/professional librarianship/archives management, including the
supervision of graduate and undergraduate students; forty percent (40%) scholarly activity, including commitments to
external granting agencies; and twenty percent (20%) University governance, administrative duties, and other
contributions to the
University.
5.40.3 The assignment of the workload shall be communicated in reasonable detail, in writing, to the
Member by June 15 by the Dean/University
Librarian. The Dean/University Librarian shall by
April 15 request the written advice of the
Department/School concerned. The Chair/Director shall submit the written advice of the
Department/School by May 1 and the
Dean/University Librarian shall normally accept the advice of the Department/School. The time-tabling of the teaching
load/library assignment shall be communicated in writing to the Member by July 15 by the Dean/University Librarian after
consultation with the Registrar. For the duration of this Collective
Agreement the Registrar shall have final authority in time-tabling all courses.
5.40.4 The composition of the workload of Members may vary with their discipline, and will take into account the
capabilities of the Members, the need to maximize their potential and any obligations placed on them within the
University's operations, consistent with the terms of this Collective Agreement. In the assignment of teaching loads, the
Deans, in consultation with the Departments/Schools, shall consider not only the number of courses taught by a
Member, but the size and type of such courses as well as administrative and other duties. Members’ workloads shall also
be subject to the following maximum norms for assigned workloads.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 78

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(a) Teaching Members: In the assignment of teaching loads by the Deans, in consultation with the academic
Departments/Schools, the maximum normal teaching load per academic year shall be two (2) full courses or twelve
(12) credit equivalents in the Faculty of
Science and Engineering and two and one- half (2 ½) full courses or fifteen (15) credit equivalents in other Faculties.
(b) Professional Librarian and Archivist Members:
In the assignment of workloads by the
University Librarian, the normal hours of scheduled student contact shall not exceed twelve (12) per week, scheduled
fairly and equitably and on the recommendation of the
Department.
(c) Notwithstanding paragraph 5.40.4 (a) above,
Members on a twelve (12) month limited-term appointment may have a teaching load of three (3) credits above the normal
teaching load. This above-normal teaching load shall be for a maximum of twelve (12) months only.
Any extension of the twelve (12) month limited-term appointment or any additional limited-term appointments to the
Member shall be according to the normal teaching load as specified as per paragraph 5.40.4 (a) above.
5.40.5 The Dean/University Librarian may include in
Members' workloads any teaching/professional library or archival assignment related to their discipline and any
on-campus administrative activity that the Dean/University Librarian considers necessary for the effective operation of the
Faculty/Library or of the University program. With regard to the load for teaching/professional librarianship/professional
archival work, generally prevailing past practices shall apply unless these practices have been the result of Members
undertaking voluntarily unpaid overloads to maintain the integrity of programmes or service commitments in
Department/Schools which have suffered complement reductions due to budgetary pressures or unless specific
provisions in this contract state otherwise.
5.40.6 The determination of the workload shall be subject to the following conditions:
(a) The Dean/University Librarian, in accordance with Article 3.10 – Academic Freedom, shall not impose specific
scholarly tasks other than the teaching/professional librarianship duties
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 79

Collective Agreement 2008-11 referred to in clause 5.40.5 above. Specific tasks related to the internal governance of the
Department/School shall not be imposed by the Dean/University Librarian, except for the appointment of an Acting
Chair/Director as in
Articles 9.15 – Selection of Chairs/Directors and 9.20 – Term of Office of Chairs/Directors.
The Dean/University Librarian may assign specific responsibilities concerning a
University-related community activity in consultation with the Member. The Member shall not unreasonably refuse.
(b) The Dean/University Librarian shall normally not impose on any individual a workload in excess of that which in the
past has generally been applicable to Members within the
Faculty/Library to which the Member belongs.
The Parties agree that excessive overload teaching/professional library work is undesirable and for that reason
compensation for teaching-related overloads from all sources, including courses administered through the Centre for
Continuing Education, shall be limited to a maximum payable for twelve (12) credits per year with a maximum of nine (9)
credits in either the Fall/Winter or the Spring/Summer sessions, the Parties further agree that the twelve (12) credit
overload allowance shall be limited to three
(3) consecutive years.
Where the above limitation on total compensation to a Member involves a component from the supervision of a distance
education course(s) according to clause
8.40.5 of Article 8.40 – Distance Education
Courses, the University shall make available marking assistance as required and in keeping with the degree of limitation.
(c) From time to time, the Dean/University
Librarian, in consultation with the
Department/School may request a Member to undertake additional duties over and above the normal workload. In such
instances, an overload payment shall be made, as in Article
8.35 – Overloads. The Member shall not unreasonably refuse such assignments.
Members who believe they are entitled to overload payments shall apply through the
Dean/University Librarian to the Vice-
President, Academic within ten (10) working days after the assignment of the workload.
The Vice-President, Academic shall provide an answer, in writing, to the Member within ten (10) working days of her/his
application. If negative, the decision shall be accompanied with reasons.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 80

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(d) In the event that a workload assignment, with regard to the courses taught or professional librarian duties or other
assigned duties, is not acceptable to the Member or the
Department/School, after discussion with the
Dean/University Librarian, the Member or the
Department/School may appeal to the Vice-
President, Academic by July 15. The decision of the Vice-President, Academic shall be communicated in writing to the
Member and
Department/School before August 1.
(e) The credits for courses approved by Senate
(Council on English Language Programmes
(CELP) and Conseil des programmes en français (CPF)) shall not be altered when the
Dean assigns the teaching of any of these courses to a Member.
(f) When a Member is assigned to teach two (2) or more courses at the same time and location, she/he shall receive
workload credit for the course with maximum credits.
5.40.7 Once assigned, workloads shall not be altered except in cases of emergency. If a proposed workload must be
altered, such alteration will be taken into consideration in the annual performance evaluation. However, alterations for
reasonable program requirements and low enrolment may be made to Winter and Spring session courses by
October 1.
If the Dean, for non-emergency reasons, deems it necessary to alter the workload of a Member once it has been
assigned, the Dean must obtain the agreement of the Member.
Any alteration to a Member’s workload, including any associated overload payments shall be communicated to each
Member of the
Department/School within five (5) working days after the Member has been formally notified of the change.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this Article, when an assigned course(s) is cancelled because of zero registration in the
course(s) there arises an obligation on the part of the Member to undertake additional work in order to maintain fairness
and equity within the Department/School. The nature and extent of such work shall be determined in discussions between
the Member, the Chair of the
Department/School and the Dean. In the event that
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 81

Collective Agreement 2008-11 the Member was scheduled to receive an overload stipend such a stipend should be
reduced appropriately. In the case where additional work assigned is in the form of a course, such course shall be one the
Member has taught in the last two (2) years, unless otherwise agreed to by the Member.
5.40.8 The determination of the workload for Members of the teaching faculty shall also be subject to the following
conditions:
(a) A Member is entitled to one (1) term without scheduled teaching among the Fall, Winter and Spring terms as part of
her/his normal workload. The scheduled teaching duties as part of a Member’s normal workload shall normally be in the
Fall and Winter terms of the academic year.
(b) In the case of correspondence or off-campus courses, consultation times shall be arranged for the teaching locale in
accordance with the requirements of the subject matter. The
Chair/Director shall outline the norms in consultation with the Department/School.
(c) In the case of evening courses, the Dean shall not assign another course scheduled to begin within twelve (12) hours
of the scheduled end of the evening course unless the Member agrees to this in writing.
(d) With the exception of Members who are teaching at this University for the first time or teaching in a new program, no
Member shall be required in an academic year to prepare for more than one (1) full course or two (2) half (1/2) courses (or
equivalent) which she/he has not taught at least once during the previous four (4) years. Normally, no Member shall be
required to undertake such course preparation more than once every two (2) years, nor shall any Member be required to
undertake new course preparation unless requested to do so by June 1. Where a course is replaced by a renamed or
renumbered version of what is essentially the same course in the same language, it shall be deemed to be the same
course for purposes of this Article.
(e) Members may be required to supervise or develop distance education courses as part of their normal workload subject
to provisions of
Article 8.40 – Distance Education Courses.
Members whose appointments specifically included the development of distance
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 82

Collective Agreement 2008-11 education courses as part of their normal workload may be assigned such duties for the
duration of their contract(s).
(f) In order to enhance the ability of Members to undertake scholarly activity, it is desirable to schedule the teaching
activities in such a way as to create blocks of time free of scheduled teaching activities. For the Fall and Winter terms, the
scheduling of courses shall permit every Member to have at least one (1) day per week for scholarly activity during which
she/he is not expected to teach scheduled classes. Members wishing to create additional such days or blocks of time
without scheduled teaching shall approach the Chair/Director of the Departments/Schools and the Dean with an
appropriate request. These officials shall make reasonable efforts to accommodate such requests within the constraints
imposed by requirements of offering programs and courses to students. When competing requests for time blocks without
scheduled teaching cannot be met for all applicants, priority shall be given to those individuals who earlier have been
unsuccessful in making such a request, provided that these were based on bona fide requirements to enhance scholarly
activity.
(g) Full-time Members teaching in programs where the preparation of a thesis is mandatory for students have an
obligation to participate in the thesis supervision provided that they are qualified to do so. However, the
Parties agree that the close working relationship desirable for the successful preparation of a thesis is best achieved
under conditions that allow for mutual choice on the part of the Member and the student before entering the
supervisor/student relationship.
(h) Notwithstanding paragraph 5.40.6 (e) above, when a Member undertakes academic supervision of an individual
student in a program offered by Laurentian University, when such work is over and above the normal workload, such
supervisory work shall be recognized upon its successful defence or completion as follows:
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 83

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Supervisory work Credit Monetary value value at
$1,000 / credit
PhD Thesis 3 $3,000
Master’s Thesis or 1 $1,000
Advanced Practicum in Social Work
PhD or Master’s ½ $500
Research Project,
Research Essay,
Directed Reading
Seminar or
Independent Study
Undergraduate (cid:110) $333
Thesis where mandatory
Undergraduate ¼ $250
Directed Reading
Seminar or
Independent Study where mandatory
(i) The above credits may be shared by agreement between two (2) or more
Members who have contributed to the thesis or other supervision. In cases of disagreement, the Dean shall arbitrate the
proportions.
(ii) A Member’s teaching credits for individual supervisions as outlined in this paragraph can be accumulated towards a
reduction of the Member’s normal teaching load to a maximum of three (3) credits release per academic year. Unused
credits can be carried over to subsequent years. The scheduling of the reduction shall be with the mutual agreement of
the
Member and her/his Dean.
(iii) Alternatively, Members may be paid the credit value accumulated for any supervisory work in their professional
expenditure account. At any time,
Members may transfer the monetary value of the accumulated credits into their professional development expenditure
account.
(iv) Once the supervisory work has been completed, it shall be the responsibility of the Member to report such
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 84

Collective Agreement 2008-11 completion to the Dean on a form co- signed by her/his Chair/Director. The
Dean’s Office shall either register the credit on the Member’s workload credit account to be created in WebAdvisor or
transfer the funds to the Member’s professional development expenditure account, as the Member directs.
(v) Based on existing program requirements, the Dean shall identify those programs which have mandatory supervisory
needs as per paragraph
5.40.8 (g) above. Any Member planning to supervise an individual student in another program for credit under this
paragraph needs the prior authorization of the Dean.
(vi) The subparagraphs 5.40.8 (h) (i) to
5.40.8 (h) (iv) above do not apply to
Research Chairs who already received a teaching load reduction.
5.40.9 The determination of the workload for professional librarians shall also be subject to the following conditions:
(a) Members may be requested to offer service during one (1) evening per week and if requested, they shall not
unreasonably refuse, provided that such requests are made on a fair and equitable basis.
(b) Professional librarians may be expected to carry library supervisory duties.
5.40.10 In order to promote scholarly activity, as defined by section B) Scholarly Activity of Article 5.15 – Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of Academics within the
University, a Member may have her/his teaching/library service workload altered. Requests for workload reductions as a
result of other paid activity shall be considered in accordance with the provisions of Article 7.35 – Voluntary Reduced
Workload. However, contract research where the
Member is paid a stipend not to exceed twenty thousand dollars ($20,000) for her/his services may be considered under
this provision.
(a) Without compensation to the University:
For such an assignment to become operative, it shall require the recommendation of the
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 85

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Department/School, of the Dean/University
Librarian, and approval of the Vice-President,
Academic. Faculty Members who receive one
(1) or more course reductions for purposes of enhancing scholarly activity, including the preparation of teaching materials
for the
Centre for Continuing Education, shall not be entitled to overloads as per paragraph 5.40.6
(b) above. This restriction shall also apply to
Librarians whose workload is also reduced for scholarly purposes.
(b) With compensation to the University:
A Member with a regular teaching load may elect to buy-out of up to fifteen (15) credits of teaching load over five (5)
years, not to exceed six (6) credits per year, or the equivalent of professional library service in order to concentrate on
research activities. It is acknowledged that certain grants may require a reduction in teaching loads exceeding fifteen (15)
credits. The buy-out must be applied for no later than April 1 of the year preceding the academic year for which it is
requested and the Dean/University
Librarian shall not unreasonably refuse such request. The Dean/University Librarian shall communicate her/his decision
by May 1. The buy-out shall cover the actual cost (including benefits) to replace the teaching/professional library work but
shall not exceed the overload or sessional rate of pay as appropriate. A
Member shall not be refused such a request for two (2) consecutive years.
5.40.11 The workload of any or all Members shall be made known to the Union on request.
5.40.12 It is acknowledged that the provision of teaching assistants is a factor to be considered in the assignment of
workloads. As such the Vice-
President, Academic will ensure to the greatest degree possible the equitable distribution amongst the Faculties of such
assistance, consistent with the policies of Academic Councils.
ARTICLE 5.45 – ANNUAL REPORT FOR MEMBERS
5.45.1 All full-time Members, except those on sabbatical or study leave who have given prior notice to their
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 86

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Dean/University Librarian of their intent to postpone submission until their return, shall submit a report in writing on their
activities for the preceding twelve (12) months to the Dean/University Librarian, through the
Chair/Director, by May 15. The report will cover all components of her/his responsibilities as listed under
Article 5.15 – Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of
Academics.
Members on sabbatical or study leave are covered by
Article 7.25 – Sabbatical Leaves and 7.30 – Study
Leave respectively.
5.45.2 In preparing their reports, Members shall use the appropriate standardised form developed for each
Faculty and the Library.
5.45.3 It is also the responsibility of the Members to provide annually an up-to-date and corrected curriculum vitae for their
personnel file.
ARTICLE 5.50 – ASSESSMENT OF A MEMBER'S
PERFORMANCE
5.50.1 When making an assessment, the assessing body shall consider the Member’s performance in the areas outlined
in Article 5.15 – Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of Academics.
5.50.2 The assessing body may consider as mitigating factors:
(a) The bilingual and tricultural character of
Laurentian University.
(b) In the case of Librarians, the amount of time available for scholarly activities.
5.50.3 The assessment of a Member's teaching performance shall be based on:
Senate approved course evaluations and the
Member's annual teaching dossier.
(a) During each term of the academic year, the
Employer shall administer the course evaluations approved by the Laurentian
University Senate. The Vice-President,
Academic shall be responsible for the distribution and collection of the said instruments. It is agreed that Members shall
have access to the results of course evaluations prior to their use by the University.
In the case of co-taught courses, the following shall apply:
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 87

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(i) For courses co-taught sequentially, there shall be separate evaluations for each professor prior to the end of each
sequence.
(ii) For all other co-taught courses, the information provided to the FPC will indicate that the evaluation in question shall be
viewed with caution.
(b) It is the responsibility of Members to maintain on an annual basis their teaching dossiers. For each course, the annual
dossier must contain at least the following material:
(i) Course syllabus and sufficient material to permit an evaluation of the contents of the course, the teaching/learning
process, and the means of assessing the performance of the students.
(ii) Sufficient material to permit the evaluation of the Member's teaching performance as perceived by groups such as
graduates, peers, or students.
(iii) The file should also contain any other material that the Member deems relevant to her/his teaching role.
(iv) In the case of co-taught courses, the
Member shall include in the dossier information about which parts of the course/s fell within her/his responsibility for
course preparation, scheduled classroom, laboratory and tutorial time with students, evaluation of students, and course
administration.
(c) Committees, which may use the results of the course evaluations and the contents of the teaching dossier in their
deliberations, shall receive suitable guidelines on their use and interpretation from the Vice-President,
Academic.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 88

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Should a Member feel that a course should be exempt from the approved evaluation process, reasons for exemption
should be addressed to the Vice-President,
Academic no later than the end of the first week of classes in that course. The Vice-President, Academic will
communicate her/his decision on the request prior to the planned date of the course evaluation.
5.50.4 Notwithstanding the priorities for teaching/librarianship and/or scholarly activities as noted in the various articles in
this Collective Agreement, the Parties recognise that the University benefits greatly from significant contributions in many
areas including academic administration and/or university governance, continuous involvement in a Member's
professional/learned society or in a community activity directly related to the work of the University. The
Parties agree that Members who have made such contributions shall have these contributions taken into especial account
as compensating for lesser performance in another area.
Notwithstanding the priorities for scholarly activities as noted in the various articles in this Collective
Agreement, the Parties recognise that the University benefits greatly from the contributions of Members who are
exceptional teachers. Members who can make such a contribution shall have this taken into especial account as
compensating for lesser performance in another area. When considering librarians, professional service and library
management skills shall be substituted for "teaching".
5.50.5 Every assessing body shall put forward its recommendation or decision in written form setting forth its findings and
grounds for recommendation or decision in order that a Member may know which factors were persuasive in a
recommendation or decision.
5.50.6 In all considerations of renewal (included in Article
5.20 – Appointment and Renewal), tenure (Article
5.60 – Tenure Evaluation Procedures), promotion
(Article 5.65 – Promotion Procedures) and merit increments (Article 8.25 – Merit Increments) the following assessment
procedure shall be used:
(a) The applicant shall submit her/his academic dossier to the Dean/University Librarian, who shall make a copy available
to the
Department/School. Members of the
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 89

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Department/School who are eligible to participate in the assessment shall have access to the applicant’s dossier.
(b) The criteria for a Member’s eligibility to vote and to participate in the assessment of applications for renewal, tenure,
promotion and merit awards are set out in each of the respective procedural articles referenced in clause 5.50.6 above.
Eligible Members who are on sabbatical or other leaves, except leaves of absence without pay or long-term disability,
continue to have the right to vote and to participate in the assessment process.
(c) In a timely fashion and with sufficient notice the Chair/Director of the Department/School or designate shall convene a
meeting of the eligible Members to assess the applicant’s academic dossier. Those eligible shall meet as often as
necessary for the purpose of writing a joint single letter of assessment for the application. A vote on the application shall
occur and be recorded. The eventual joint single letter of assessment shall be communicated to the applicant.
(d) The proceedings of the meetings are to be undertaken in camera. It is understood that nothing in this Article shall
prevent a Member from discussing with the Union concerns about potential breaches of the Collective
Agreement.
(e) In exceptional circumstances, where an eligible Member is unable to attend
Department/School assessment committee meetings, the Member may submit to the committee an individual letter of
assessment with her/his recommendation and vote, both of which shall be incorporated into the joint single letter of
assessment of the
Department/School. The individual letter of assessment with her/his recommendation and vote shall be provided and read
to the
Department/School assessment committee during the course of its deliberations.
(f) The joint single letter of assessment shall state the recommendation, the reasons and evidence for the
recommendation, the votes for, against and abstaining from the recommendation, and the names of Members
participating in the assessment process. The joint single letter of assessment shall include both majority and minority
recommendations and reasons for the different
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 90

Collective Agreement 2008-11 recommendations where Members request.
Prior to its submission, the assessment committee’s joint single letter of assessment shall be reviewed by all participants
in the assessment process for final approval of its accuracy. Participants who do not approve of the joint single letter of
assessment may submit a written signed letter regarding the accuracy of the joint single letter of assessment which shall
be attached to the joint single letter of assessment.
(g) A copy of the joint single letter of assessment with any submitted attachment/s as referenced in paragraph 5.50.6 (f)
above will comprise the complete assessment of the applicant by the assessment committee. The
Chair/Director of the Department/School shall forward the complete assessment of the applicant by the assessment
committee simultaneously to the applicant and to the
Chair of the FPC/FFPC/LPC. The applicant has the right to respond in writing to the complete assessment of the applicant
by the assessment committee within five (5) working days of its receipt. The applicant shall send her/his response, if any,
directly to the Chair of the FPC/FFPC/LPC.
(h) In assessing applicants, the Dean/University
Librarian shall not see internal or external letters of assessment before submitting her/his own independent letter of
assessment of the applicant. The Dean/University
Librarian shall forward her/his own independent letter of assessment of the applicant simultaneously to the Chair of the
FPC/FFPC/LPC and to the applicant. The applicant has the right to respond in writing to the Dean’s/University Librarian’s
independent letter of assessment of the applicant within five (5) working days of its receipt. The applicant shall send
her/his response, if any, directly to the Chair of the FPC/FFPC/LPC.
(i) All letters of assessment internal to the
University shall be signed and the recommendations shall be based on evidence.
(j) In Departments/Schools with fewer than four
(4) eligible colleagues apart from the applicant, the applicant’s Dean/University
Librarian in consultation with the
Department/School and approval of the
Union, shall add eligible Members from other
Departments/Schools so that a minimum of four (4) eligible Members is attained.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 91

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(k) Where the applicant is appointed to more than one (1) Department/School, a written assessment concerning the
contributions the applicant has made to the cross-appointed
Department/School shall be undertaken by the cross-appointed Department/School provided in accordance with the terms
specified in clause 5.20.32 and clause
5.20.33 of Article 5.20 – Appointment and
Renewal. The complete assessment of the applicant by the assessment committee of the
Department/School of primary responsibility and the written assessment of the cross- appointed Department/School shall
be weighted by the FPC/FFPC/LPC to reflect proportionately the extent of the Member’s responsibilities in each of the
Departments/Schools. The applicant has the right to respond to the written assessment of the cross-appointed
Department/School in writing within five (5) working days of its receipt. The applicant shall send her/his response, if any,
directed to the Chair of the
FPC/FFPC/LPC.
(l) Any required external letters of assessment as per Article 5.65 – Promotion Procedures shall be sent directly to the
Vice-President,
Academic, who shall edit these external letters of assessment only to conceal the identities of the external assessors. The
Vice-President, Academic shall then forward the external letters of assessment simultaneously to the Chair of the
FPC/FFPC/LPC and the applicant. The applicant has the right to respond in writing to the external letters of assessment
within five
(5) working days of its receipt.
(m) The Chair of the FPC/FFPC/LPC shall make available the academic dossier of the applicant to the FPC/FFPC/LPC
and simultaneously send to the FPC/FFPC/LPC and to the applicant the complete assessment of the applicant by the
assessment committee(s), the independent letter of assessment as authored by the
Dean/University Librarian, all applicant response letters and any external letters of assessment.
(n) When the FPC/FFPC/LPC has completed its inquiries and deliberations in accordance with its responsibilities as
outlined in clause 5.55.6 of Article 5.55 – Faculty/Francophone
Faculty/Library Personnel Committee, it will forward its letter of recommendation on the applicant's application, including
reasons for its recommendation, to the Vice-President,
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 92

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Academic with a copy to the applicant. Each letter of recommendation on the applicant’s application shall contain the
following paragraph: "The Member may make written representations to the Vice-President,
Academic within ten (10) working days of the date on which the FPC/FFPC/LPC forwards to the Member a copy of its
letter of recommendation on the applicant’s application to the Vice-President, Academic."
(o) The Vice-President, Academic shall confirm or reject the FPC/FFPC/LPC's recommendation or refer it back to the
FPC/FFPC/LPC for further clarification of specified issues. In the case of referrals, the
Committee must re-examine and address the
Vice-President, Academic's concern.
(p) The final decision of the Vice-President,
Academic shall be communicated in writing with reasons to the Member with a copy to the
Union. The FPC/FFPC/LCP and the
Dean/University Librarian shall receive a copy of the letter sent to the Member. In making a final decision, the
Vice-President, Academic shall take into consideration the written representations outlined in paragraph 5.50.6
(n) above of the applicant to the Vice-
President, Academic. In cases of referrals, the Vice-President, Academic, in making a final decision, shall also take into
consideration the response of the
FPC/FFPC/LPC to the specific concerns expressed.
(q) The specific deadlines and procedures applicable for renewal, tenure, promotion and merit increments are outlined in
Article 5.20 –
Appointment and Renewal, Article 5.60 –
Tenure Evaluation Procedures, Article 5.65 –
Promotion Procedures and Article 8.25 –
Merit Increments, respectively.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 93

Collective Agreement 2008-11
ARTICLE 5.55 – FACULTY/FRANCOPHONE
FACULTY/LIBRARY PERSONNEL COMMITTEE
5.55.1 Structure of the FPC/FFPC/LPC
(a) In each Faculty there shall be a Faculty
Personnel Committee (FPC) composed of seven (7) elected Members plus one (1) alternate. A Dean/University Librarian
appointed by the Vice-President, Academic shall be the non-voting Chair. All Members of the FPC must be tenured and
no more than two (2) Members shall belong to the same academic Department/School. Except as provided in paragraph
5.55.1 (c) below, at least three (3) Members shall be Full
Professors from within that Faculty. Every effort shall be made to seek nominations from female Members.
(b) There shall also be a Francophone Faculty
Personnel Committee (FFPC) composed of eight (8) members, two (2) from each of the four (4) existing Faculties. The
elected
Member with the lowest number of votes shall serve as the alternate. A Dean/University
Librarian appointed by the Vice-President,
Academic (Francophone Affairs) shall be the non-voting Chair. All Members of the FFPC must be tenured and qualified
Francophone
Members i.e. must have taught or be scheduled to teach a course in French at
Laurentian. Except as provided in paragraph
5.55.1 (d) below, at least three (3) Members shall be Full Professors. Potential candidates will be identified by the Office
of the Vice-
President, Academic (Francophone Affairs).
Every effort shall be made to seek nominations from female Members.
If a Member wishes to have her/his case heard by the Francophone Faculty Personnel
Committee, this intention must be indicated in writing at the time the application is made; otherwise the application will be
heard by the appropriate FPC. Applications are to be sent to the appropriate Dean who will forward these to the
non-voting Chair of the Francophone
Faculty Personnel Committee. Once a
Member has selected a Committee, she/he is not free to change to another Committee either in that academic year or in
the following year if the application was unsuccessful.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 94

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(c) In the Library, there shall be a Library
Personnel Committee (LPC) composed of five
(5) elected Members and one (1) alternate. A
Dean appointed by the Vice-President,
Academic shall be the non-voting Chair. All
Members of the LPC must be tenured and except as provided in paragraph 5.55.1 (d) below, two (2) Members shall be
Full
Professors/Librarians. There shall be at least two (2) Members from the Library and at least two (2) must be Members of a
Faculty outside the Library. Every effort shall be made to seek nominations from female Members. In the event that a
Member from the Library wishes to have her/his case heard by a Francophone
Faculty Personnel Committee the Parties will reach agreement on the composition of such a
Committee by Memorandum of Agreement.
(d) In the event that the requirements in paragraphs 5.55.1 (a), (b) or (c) above cannot be met, the first priority in dealing
with insufficient Members at a rank shall be to seek nominations by Members of that
Faculty/Library of Members of another
Faculty/Library at the required rank. The second priority shall be to seek nominations by
Members of that Faculty/Library of Members from the next lower rank within the same
Faculty/Library.
(e) In the Faculty of Management, there shall be a Faculty Personnel Committee (FPC) composed of five (5) elected
Members and one (1) alternate. A Dean appointed by the
Vice-President, Academic shall be the non- voting Chair. All Members of this FPC must be tenured and except as
provided in paragraph 5.55.1 (d) above, two (2) Members shall be Full Professors/Librarians. There shall be two (2)
Members from the School of
Commerce, one (1) from the School of Sports
Administration and two (2) must be Members of a Faculty outside the Faculty of
Management. Every effort shall be made to seek nominations from female Members.
5.55.2 Election of the FPC/FFPC/LPC Members
(a) The Secretary of Senate shall conduct the elections of the Faculty/Library Personnel
Committees by October 15 of each year. The
Employer and the Union each shall appoint one (1) scrutineer for the elections.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 95

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(b) Nominations shall be by Members of each
Faculty/Library. Voting shall be by Members of the faculty/library for Members of their own
FPC/FFPC/LPC. Qualified Francophone
Members may vote in the elections for faculty representatives on both the FPC and FFPC.
Elections shall be conducted by the office of the Secretary of Senate by secret preferential ballot. Except as described in
paragraph
5.55.1 (b) above the alternate will be the nominee, not elected who received the greatest number of votes.
(c) Any tenured Member may be a member of the
FPC/FFPC/LPC it being understood that:
(i) No Vice-Dean may be a committee member.
(ii) The President of the Union and the
Chief Grievance Officer of the Union may not be committee members.
(iii) An elected member may not serve for more than two (2) consecutive terms.
(iv) A Member may not be a committee member during the academic year she/he is on sabbatical.
(v) No Member may serve on more than one (1) FPC/FFPC/LPC in the same academic year.
(d) In the event that any positions of an
FPC/FFPC/LPC are not filled through the election process outlined, the Dean/University
Librarian, or in the case of the FFPC, the Vice-
President, Academic (Francophone Affairs), and an appointee of the Union’s Board shall seek, within five (5) working
days, a mutually acceptable candidate(s) who shall be named to serve.
5.55.3 Term of Office and Vacancies
(a) The term of office of elected and appointed
FPC/FFPC/LPC members shall be two (2) years, starting on October 16 following the election. To ensure continuity, the
terms shall be staggered.
(c) A committee member who makes an application for promotion or for whatever reason is being evaluated by the
FPC/FFPC/LPC shall be deemed to have resigned from the committee.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 96

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(c) In the event that replacements are needed, the
Dean/University Librarian or in the case of the
FFPC, the Vice-President, Academic
(Francophone Affairs) and an appointee of the
Union’s Board shall (subject to clause 5.55.1 above) seek a mutually acceptable tenured candidate who shall be named to
serve.
5.55.4 Voting, Recording and Reporting Procedures
(a) A quorum shall consist of the full committee.
The alternate may replace any elected
Member when needed to obtain quorum.
(b) The alternate Member shall act in the absence of a regular Member in order to obtain quorum.
A regular Member who is unable to attend meetings shall so inform the Chair. The Chair shall formally invite the alternate
to replace the regular Member. The alternate Member shall be kept informed of Committee proceedings and shall be
invited to attend all meetings. The alternate Member has an obligation to stay abreast of the matters discussed.
(c) All decisions of the Committee shall be recorded. In order to establish which factors were persuasive in any given
decision, the
FPC/FFPC/LPC shall set forth in its decision its findings and the grounds for its decision.
These decisions shall be kept in the office of the Dean/University Librarian and in the case of the FFPC, in the office of the
appropriate
Dean and shall be available to the members of the Committee. Committee members shall make their decisions in a
manner consistent with the Collective Agreement. A copy of the decisions shall be forwarded to the applicant.
Each decision shall contain the following paragraph: "The Member may make written representations to the
Vice-President,
Academic within ten (10) working days of the date on which the FPC/FFPC/LPC forwards to the Member a copy of its
decision to the Vice-
President, Academic."
(d) Decisions of the FPC/FFPC/LPC on renewal shall be by majority vote. Decisions of the
FPC/FFPC, excluding the FPC for the Faculty of Management, on tenure and promotion shall require five (5) positive
votes. Decisions of the
LPC and the FPC for the Faculty of
Management on tenure and promotion shall require four (4) positive votes. Members of the committee shall record their
vote on an official
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 97

Collective Agreement 2008-11 ballot with their name on it and shall write on the ballot a reasonable opinion supporting the
vote. The Chair shall rely on these opinions in writing the committee's decision. Prior to sending the committee's decision
to the Vice-
President, Academic, the report must be brought to FPC/FFPC/LPC for review.
Members of the committee who wish to add a minority opinion may do so by submitting a written signed opinion which will
be attached to the majority decision. Official ballots shall be retained until all procedures up to and including arbitration
have been exhausted.
(e) Prior to the end of each academic year (April
7), the Chair of the FPC/FFPC/LPC shall make an annual report to the Vice-President,
Academic summarising the activities and decisions of the FPC/FFPC/LPC. This report shall indicate all decisions that
were referred back to the FPC/FFPC/LPC by the Vice-
President, Academic. A copy of this annual report shall also be sent to the President of the
Union.
5.55.5 Operating Procedures
The Chairs of FPC/FFPC/LPC shall ensure that at the commencement of evaluations for promotion and tenure all
members of the Committee are familiar with the employment equity policies.
(a) No Member of an FPC/FFPC/LPC shall participate in the evaluation/assessment of
Members at the Department/School level.
(b) (i) An applicant may ask that an
FPC/FFPC/LPC Member recuse herself/himself in her/his particular case, on the grounds that a conflict of interest exists,
or that a reasonable apprehension of bias exists, subject to
Appendix J – Committee on the
Apprehension of Bias. The applicant shall state the reasons in writing to the
Chair of the Committee. The Chair shall render a decision with reasons to the applicant and the Member in question if the
Member is to be recused. Even without a request from the applicant, the Chair of the
FPC/FFPC/LPC may require a Member to recuse herself/himself on one (1) of the same two (2) grounds. A Member may
recuse herself/himself on her/his own volition.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 98

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(ii) In the context of collegial decision making, prior service in the same
Department/School, joint service on
University or Union committees or other normal acquaintance by itself does not necessarily constitute grounds for the
presumption of conflict of interest or bias.
(c) Before making any decision or recommendation on any individual Member, the FPC/FFPC/LPC shall:
(i) Invite the Member to meet with the
FPC/FFPC/LPC. The Member may be accompanied by a colleague of her/his choice.
(ii) Take into account but not be limited to the following evidence:
Those parts of the Member's current personnel file that are relevant to the matter being discussed. The Member shall be
provided with a list of material from the personnel file that is being considered and that has not accompanied the
application.
The assessments by the
Members of the
Department(s)/School(s) and by the Dean/University Librarian.
Any relevant material specified in the applicant's letter of application or curriculum vitae.
The applicant shall be responsible within reason for producing one true copy of any material that she/he wishes to be
considered.
The oral and/or written submission made by the applicant.
Such other factual information as is necessary to understand the evidence.
(d) Once an FPC/FFPC/LPC has started to consider a case, it shall be the responsibility of that FPC/FFPC/LPC to see
that case through to completion even if the process extends
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 99

Collective Agreement 2008-11 beyond one (1) academic year. In the event that replacements are needed, the
Dean/University Librarian and an appointee of the Union’s Board shall (subject to clause
5.55.1 above) seek a mutually acceptable tenured Member(s) who shall be named to serve.
5.55.6 Responsibilities of the FPC/FFPC/LPC
(a) To formulate and forward to the Vice-President,
Academic its decisions for those Members of the Faculty/Library whose names are being considered for the following:
(i) Renewal of Probationary Appointment per Article 5.20 – Appointment and
Renewal;
(ii) Tenure per Article 5.60 – Tenure
Evaluation Procedures;
(iii) Promotion per Article 5.65 – Promotion
Procedures;
(iv) Merit increments as per Article 8.25 –
Merit Increments.
(b) To make submissions on such matters as termination due to redundancy or financial exigency when requested to do
so.
(c) To act as consultant on any other matters as requested by the University or required by the terms of this Collective
Agreement.
5.55.7 Deadlines
In the event that an FPC/FFPC/LPC is unable to meet any of the deadlines set out in this Collective
Agreement by virtue of its inability to meet with quorum, then all subsequent deadlines in the particular procedure are
extended by the length of time that FPC/FFPC/LPC requires to meet with quorum and make its decision or
recommendation.
ARTICLE 5.60 – TENURE EVALUATION PROCEDURES
5.60.1 In the interest of the University community and of society at large tenure protects free criticism and independent
judgement and hence forms an integral
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 100

Collective Agreement 2008-11 part of Academic Freedom per Article 3.10 –
Academic Freedom.
5.60.2 Tenure means permanency of appointment. Such an appointment may be terminated through resignation,
retirement, dismissal for cause as established by a proper hearing, redundancy or financial exigency consistent with the
terms of this Collective
Agreement, or as otherwise stated in this Collective
Agreement. Tenure includes the right during appointment to academic freedom and to fair consideration for increases in
responsibility and salary, and promotions in rank.
5.60.3 Tenure Evaluation
(a) Members on probationary appointments shall normally begin to undergo a formal tenure evaluation by the
FPC/FFPC/LPC no later than September 30 of the final year of their probationary status. However, Members may apply
for tenure one (1) year prior to the final year of their probationary status. An early application for tenure may not result in a
termination of appointment. Members considered for tenure at the end of the normal probationary period may be awarded
tenure, denied tenure, or if the Member has not made an early application for tenure, may have her/his probationary
period extended by one
(1) additional year, during which she/he shall be evaluated for tenure for a final time. A
Member may not be considered for tenure more than twice.
(b) All Members on probationary appointments shall begin to undergo a formal tenure evaluation by the FPC/FFPC/LPC
no later than September 30 of the final year of their probationary status.
(i) However, in recognition of the fact that
Members may have to deal with heavier than normal personal responsibilities or extraordinary circumstances, not faced
by the majority of other Members, the opportunity is provided for a Member to request a delay of up to two (2) years in the
tenure review process.
Members wishing to delay their final tenure evaluation must apply in writing to the appropriate Dean/University
Librarian no later than August 1 of the
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 101

Collective Agreement 2008-11 final year of their probationary appointment describing the special circumstances why a
delay in tenure review is requested, identifying the particular area in the performance of the Member that would be
strengthened by the delay and what steps the Member will take to meet the requirements for tenure during the period of
the delay. The
Dean/University Librarian, after discussion with the appropriate
Department(s)/School(s) will forward a recommendation to the Vice-
President, Academic who will render a decision by September 8. The Vice-
President, Academic may authorise a delay in tenure evaluation for up to two
(2) years. If the Vice-President,
Academic does not authorise a delay in tenure evaluation, the evaluation will proceed. Failure by the Vice-
President, Academic to authorise a delay in tenure evaluation shall not be subject to grievance and arbitration.
(ii) Members who have taken pregnancy, parental or adoption leave as provided under Article 7.60 – Pregnancy,
Parental and Adoption Leaves during their probationary period may elect to postpone the mandated evaluations leading to
tenure (both the evaluation for renewal of the probationary appointment and the final tenure evaluation) by one (1) year for
each incident of leave period.
(c) For the teaching faculty, in making its recommendations, the FPC/FFPC shall be guided by the following standards:
(i) A record of satisfactory teaching in the pre-tenure years based on the teaching dossier and approved course
evaluations as set out in Article 5.15 –
Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of
Academics and clause 5.50.2 of Article
5.50 – Assessment of a Member’s
Performance. The nature and scope of past teaching activities shall be
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 102

Collective Agreement 2008-11 taken into account in assessing a
Member. If the applicant has faced problems in teaching, the FPC/FFPC will look for evidence that the applicant has
recognized the problems, has taken steps to improve, and has made some improvements.
(ii) A record of satisfactory scholarly activity as defined in Article 5.15 –
Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of
Academics. The applicant shall show progress in independent research or creative activity.
(iii) A record of contributions to University governance and administrative duties as set out in Article 5.15 – Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of
Academics.
(iv) The applicant has met the formal educational or professional qualifications for the rank of Assistant
Professor and bilingualism qualifications as set out in Article 5.10
– Academic Qualifications Guidelines, clause 3.30.5 of Article 3.30 –
Bilingualism and Letter of
Appointment, consistent with the
Collective Agreement.
(v) The FPC/FFPC shall be flexible in assessing stronger performance in some areas against weaker performance in
other areas as set out in clause 5.50.3 of Article 5.50 –
Assessment of a Member’s
Performance. However, in no instance shall it recommend tenure for an applicant if teaching performance is judged
mostly unsatisfactory or if the applicant is not engaged in a program of scholarly activity.
(d) For the librarian faculty, in making its recommendations, the LPC/FFPC shall be guided by the following standards:
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 103

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(i) A record of satisfactory professional librarianship/archives management in the pre-tenure years based on the academic
dossier as set out in Article
5.15 – Rights, Responsibilities and
Duties of Academics and Article 5.50 –
Assessment of a Member’s
Performance. If the applicant has faced problems in professional librarianship/archives management, the LPC/FFPC will
look for evidence that the applicant has recognized the problems, has taken steps to improve, and has made some
improvements.
(ii) A record of satisfactory scholarly activity as defined in Article 5.15 –
Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of
Academics. The applicant shall show progress in independent research or creative activity.
(iii) A record of contributions to University governance and administrative duties as set out in Article 5.15 – Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of
Academics.
(iv) The applicant has met the formal educational/professional/linguistic qualifications for the rank of Assistant
Librarian or Assistant Archivist and bilingualism qualifications as set out in
Article 5.10 – Academic Qualifications
Guidelines, clause 3.30.5 of Article
3.30 – Bilingualism and Letter of
Appointment, consistent with the
Collective Agreement.
(v) The LPC/FFPC shall be flexible in assessing stronger performance in some areas against weaker performance in
other areas as set out in clause 5.50.3 of Article 5.50 –
Assessment of a Member’s
Performance. However, in no instance shall it recommend tenure for an applicant if the applicant’s performance in
professional librarianship/archives management is
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 104

Collective Agreement 2008-11 judged mostly unsatisfactory or if the applicant is not engaged in a program of scholarly
activity.
(e) In making recommendations in tenure cases, the FPC/FFPC/LPC shall conduct its assessment of the applicant’s
application according to Article 5.50 – Assessment of a
Member’s Performance subject to the following:
(i) Only tenured Members of the appropriate Department(s)/School(s) are eligible to participate in the assessment process
of the applicant’s application except under the circumstances defined in clause 5.50.6
(j) of Article 5.50 – Assessment of a
Member’s Performance. By October
15, each tenured Member has a responsibility to participate in the assessment process, except those on sabbatical or
other leaves.
(ii) The Chair/Director of the
Department/School shall forward to the Chair of the FPC/FFPC/LPC the academic dossier and the complete assessment
of the applicant by the assessment committee not later than
October 20. The Dean/University
Librarian shall forward to the Chair of the FPC/FFPC/LPC her/his independent letter of assessment of the applicant not
later than October
20.
(iii) The Chair of the FPC/FFPC/LPC shall make available the academic dossier of the applicant to the FPC/FFPC/LPC
and simultaneously send to the
FPC/FFPC/LPC and to the applicant the complete assessment of the applicant by the assessment committee(s), the
independent letter of assessment as authored by the
Dean/University Librarian, all applicant response letters and any external letters of assessment not later than the end of
the business day on the second
(2nd) working day which follows the
October 20 deadline as referenced in subparagraph 5.60.3 (e) (ii) above.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 105

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(iv) The FPC/FFPC/LPC shall interview the applicant.
(v) The FPC/FFPC/LPC shall submit its letter of recommendation on the applicant’s application, including reasons for its
recommendation, to the
Vice-President, Academic with a copy to the applicant not later than
November 30 of the academic year in which the assessment takes place.
Each letter of recommendation on the applicant’s application shall contain the following paragraph: "The
Member may make written representations to the Vice-President,
Academic within ten (10) working days of the date on which the
FPC/FFPC/LPC forwards to the
Member a copy of its letter of recommendation on the applicant’s application to the Vice-President,
Academic."
5.60.4 Within thirty (30) working days of receipt of the
FPC/FFPC/LPC recommendation, the Vice-
President, Academic shall confirm or reject the recommendation, or refer it back to the
FPC/FFPC/LPC for further clarification of specified issues. In the case of referrals, the Committee must re-examine and
address the Vice-President,
Academic’s concern within twenty-one (21) working days.
5.60.5 The final decision of the Vice-President, Academic, whether or not to offer tenure, shall be communicated in writing
with reasons to the Member with a copy to the Union by February 25 of the academic year in which the Member is
considered for tenure. The FPC/FFPC/LPC and the
Dean/University Librarian shall receive a copy of the letter sent to the Member. In making a final decision, the
Vice-President, Academic shall take into consideration the written representations outlined in subparagraph 5.60.3 (e) (v)
above of the applicant to the Vice-President, Academic. In cases of referrals, the Vice-President, Academic, in making a
final decision, shall also take into consideration the response of the FPC/FFPC/LPC to the specific concerns expressed. If
the decision is not communicated to the Member by March 1, the
Member will be guaranteed employment for the next academic year. In any event, a failure to meet deadlines shall not
constitute the awarding of tenure.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 106

Collective Agreement 2008-11
5.60.6 All Members of the Bargaining Unit with tenure on
July 1, 1980 shall continue to have tenure.
5.60.7 All full-time professional Librarians of the Bargaining
Unit having previously been evaluated for a permanent position at the University shall be deemed to have tenure effective
July 1, 1980.
ARTICLE 5.65 – PROMOTION PROCEDURES
5.65.1 The term "promotion" applies to advancement from the rank of Lecturer to Assistant Professor, Assistant
Professor to Associate Professor and Associate
Professor to Full Professor, or to corresponding advancement for the Librarians from the rank of
General Librarian to Assistant Librarian, Assistant
Librarian to Associate Librarian and Associate
Librarian to Full Librarian.
5.65.2 A Member is eligible to apply for promotion while on leave, but the Member is responsible for maintaining contact
with the University and for all expenses incurred in making appearances when requested.
5.65.3 Members shall normally apply for their own promotion. Applications may also be submitted by
Chairs/Directors, or a Dean/University Librarian on behalf of Members who have not themselves applied where the
Members have declared their willingness to be considered.
5.65.4 Applications shall be made on the prescribed application form and forwarded in triplicate to the office of the
applicant's Dean/University Librarian, together with three (3) copies of all necessary and relevant documentation.
5.65.5 The application for promotion shall reach the
Dean/University Librarian not later than September
30, for decision in that academic year. Members are urged to consult with the Dean/University Librarian well in advance of
the application deadline. If the
Member so requests by September 8, the
Dean/University Librarian will prepare a preliminary written assessment based on the requirements set out in the
appropriate clauses of Article 5.10 – Academic
Qualifications Guidelines within one (1) week of receiving the Member’s application. A copy of this assessment will
immediately be forwarded to the
Member who will then have one (1) week to decide whether or not to proceed with the application.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 107

Collective Agreement 2008-11
5.65.6 The following documents must be attached to the application for promotion and must be submitted at the time of
application:
(a) An updated curriculum vitae of the applicant.
(b) For applications for promotion to Full
Professor/Librarian:
(i) A list of at least three (3) referees, of which two (2) will be chosen, from outside the University qualified to assess the
research and creative works of the applicant.
(ii) A copy of the research and creative works the applicant wishes to have considered in the examination of the
application, it being understood that the applicant may attach a clear and detailed description of these works when the
works are such that their physical submission is not practical.
Barring unusual circumstances, it is assumed that all research and creative works submitted by the applicant will be made
available to the external referees for review.
5.65.7 In making recommendations in promotion cases, the assessment procedure in Article 5.50 – Assessment of a
Member’s Performance is to be followed. Those eligible to vote in promotions shall be tenured members.
5.65.8 Under the terms of Article 5.50 – Assessment of a
Member’s Performance, the Dean/University Librarian will prepare an independent letter of assessment for each Member
who has applied for promotion. She/He shall forward this to the appropriate FPC/FFPC/LPC not later than October 31. For
promotions to the rank of Full Professor/Librarian, the Dean/University
Librarian may append additional comments to the assessment within one (1) week of receiving the reports of the external
assessors. These assessments shall be made available to Members as soon as they are prepared and at least one (1)
week before an FPC/FFPC/LPC considers a given case.
5.65.9 The appropriate FPC/FFPC/LPC shall study each application and all relevant documentation and shall decide
whether the criteria have been met. In making the decision, the FPC/FFPC/LPC shall refer to:
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 108

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(a) Article 5.10 – Academic Qualifications
Guidelines
(b) Article 5.15 – Rights, Responsibilities and
Duties of Academics
(c) Article 5.50 – Assessment of a Member's
Performance
For appointment/promotion to the rank of Full
Professor/Librarian, the FPC/FFPC/LPC shall consider the assessment of the Member's scholarly activity as judged by
four (4) external referees. Two
(2) of these referees will be nominated by the applicant if the applicant so requests. Should the applicant fail to nominate
one (1) or both external referees, the Member’s Department/School will nominate the required referees. The additional
external referees shall be appointed by the Vice-
President, Academic after consultation with the
Department/School. All external evaluations shall come to FPC/FFPC/LPC duly signed by the author.
5.65.10 When the FPC/FFPC/LPC has completed its inquiries and deliberations it will forward its letter of recommendation
on the applicant’s application to the
Vice-President, Academic with a copy to the applicant. Except in the case of the applications for promotion to Full
Professor/Librarian, this shall be done by February 15. Each letter of recommendation on the applicant’s application shall
contain the following paragraph: "The Member may make written representations to the Vice-President, Academic within
ten (10) working days of the date on which the
FPC/FFPC/LPC forwards to the Member a copy of its letter of recommendation on the applicant’s application to the
Vice-President, Academic."
5.65.11 No later than March 7, the Vice-President, Academic shall confirm or reject the recommendation, or refer it back,
to the FPC/FFPC/LPC for further clarification of specified issues. In the case of referrals, the
Committee must re-examine and address the Vice-
President, Academic's concern no later than March
31.
5.65.12 The final decision of the Vice-President, Academic, whether or not to promote, shall be communicated in writing
with reasons to the Member with a copy to the Union by April 15 of the academic year in which the Member is considered
for tenure. The
FPC/FFPC/LPC and the Dean/University Librarian shall receive a copy of the letter sent to the Member.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 109

Collective Agreement 2008-11
In making a final decision, the Vice-President,
Academic shall take into consideration the written representations outlined in clause 5.65.10 above of the applicant to the
Vice-President, Academic. In cases of referrals, the Vice-President, Academic, in making a final decision, shall also take
into consideration the response of the FPC/FFPC/LPC to the specific concerns expressed.
5.65.13 In the case of Members at the rank of
Lecturer/General Librarian who are awarded a
Doctoral degree, they shall be promoted to the rank of
Assistant Professor/Librarian effective January 1 or
July 1 whichever next follows the award of the degree.
The Doctorate will be deemed to have been received when the individual can provide a diploma or a letter from the
university where the Doctorate is being obtained indicating that all the conditions for the
Doctorate, including the thesis defence and the corrections to the thesis, have been met. Members must supply a copy of
the diploma or of the letter to their Dean/University Librarian with a normal application form as well as an updated
curriculum vitae before the promotion procedures will be initiated.
In the case of librarians, Members must also demonstrate that they are holders of a Master's degree in Library Science if
their Doctorate is not in
Library Science.
ARTICLE 5.70 – PERSONNEL FILES
5.70.1 Official personnel files of a Member shall be kept by the appropriate Dean/University Librarian, with copy in the
office of the Vice-President, Academic. There shall be two (2) types of files for Members, active files and archival files.
Active files shall contain only information allowed under this Article. Archival files shall contain material which has been
banned for use in subsequent proceedings as in clauses 5.70.5 to
5.70.9 below but which the University requires for matters other than those related to this Collective
Agreement.
5.70.2 Members shall have the right to examine all of their personnel files during normal business hours, after notice in
writing, in the presence of the
Dean/University Librarian or a person authorised by the Dean/University Librarian. Material in the files which is to be held
confidential according to the provisions of this Collective Agreement will be removed from the files prior to their inspection
by the
Member. However, an inventory of this confidential material, certified by the Dean/University Librarian, will be provided to
the Member, such inventory shall
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 110

Collective Agreement 2008-11 identify all confidential documents by authorship (if appropriate), date and general subject
matter only.
5.70.3 Members may request the Vice-President, Academic to provide one (1) copy of their personnel file, excluding
confidential material according to the provisions of this Collective Agreement but including the inventory thereof. Such
requests will be filled within five (5) working days, at no charge to the
Member. One (1) copy of additions made subsequent to the initial copying may be requested under the same conditions
and terms. Requests for additional copies will be filled at the convenience of the
Vice-President, Academic.
5.70.4 No anonymous material concerning any Member shall be kept by the Employer for inclusion in the Member's
personnel file. Statistical summaries of student evaluations or written summaries of student comments unrelated to
Senate sanctioned course evaluations, such summaries to exclude anonymous comments, shall neither be considered
anonymous nor confidential and shall remain available when required by this Collective Agreement.
5.70.5 Members shall have the right to have all of their files supplemented or corrected in the event of error, or
inadequacy. In the event of alleged distortion,
Members shall have the right to provide additional material for inclusion in their personnel files. Members shall have the
right to request the removal from their personnel file of any false, irrelevant or unsubstantiated material. Such requests
shall be made through the Dean/University Librarian as appropriate and must be accompanied with reasons why the
material is false, irrelevant or unsubstantiated. In the event of refusal by the
Dean/University Librarian of such a request, the
Dean/University Librarian shall provide the Member with reasons why the material is true, relevant or substantiated, and
shall send a copy of that response to the Union. Members can grieve according to the provisions of this Collective
Agreement, providing only that such grievance is initiated within forty-five (45) working days of notification by the
Employer to the
Members that the material in dispute is to be included in their personnel file.
5.70.6 Letters of assessments received in relation to the appointment of a Member shall be confidential and shall not be
submitted as evidence in any subsequent proceedings against that Member.
5.70.7 Letters of reprimand are inadmissible evidence if used against a Member for any purpose when no further
disciplinary measures have been imposed on the
Member for two (2) subsequent academic years. In advance of any proceedings involving the Member,
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 111

Collective Agreement 2008-11 the Dean/University Librarian shall remove such letters from the Member's personnel file
and place them in a University depository. The Member shall be notified that this has been done.
5.70.8 All letters or assessments solicited by the
FPC/FFPC/LPC and any summaries thereof shall be kept confidential and used only for the purposes for which they were
solicited in any subsequent proceedings against that Member.
5.70.9 Student evaluations, in numerical or written form, shall not be admissible as evidence in any process involving a
Member's tenure, promotion or dismissal if such evaluations are more than five (5) years old.
5.70.10 A full copy of a Member's file, including all letters of reference and assessments except those excluded by the
provisions of this Collective Agreement, shall be made available to the FPC/FFPC/LPC and the Vice-
President, Academic at their request for the purpose of promotion and tenure evaluation. Such committees will treat the
file as confidential.
5.70.11 When confidential information is to be used by the
Employer in the course of proceedings to resolve a grievance, the detailed substance of such confidential information
shall be made available at least one (1) week in advance of the hearing to Members or their duly authorised
representative in a form which does not identify the author. For arbitration, reasonable efforts will be made to supply the
information as soon as practicable, subject to the above.
5.70.12 Where in the opinion of an arbitrator the identity of the author is central to the resolution of the difference, the
arbitrator shall be supplied with the information and may make use of it as essential to her/his decision while maintaining
the confidentiality thereof.
5.70.13 The Employer agrees not to release any individually identifiable information concerning a Member or
Members without the written consent of the
Member(s), except as provided for in Article 2.50 –
Information.
5.70.14 In the case of an appeal against dismissal, the contents of the official personnel file shall be made available to the
Member as a true copy if and when the formal grievance procedure has been initiated using the same protection of
confidentiality as stated in clause 5.70.11 above.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 112

Collective Agreement 2008-11
ARTICLE 5.75 – DISCIPLINARY MEASURES
5.75.1 Discipline of Members by the Employer shall be only for cause. Disciplinary action shall be just and reasonable and
be commensurate with the offense.
5.75.2 "Cause" for disciplinary measures shall include:
(a) Serious unprofessional behaviour.
(b) Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this Collective Agreement, minor technical violations excepted.
5.75.3 The following are the only formal "Disciplinary
Measures" which may be taken by the Employer against a Member:
(a) A letter of reprimand, specifying the grounds and adding this reprimand to the personnel file of the Member concerned;
(b) The withholding of an annual increment;
(c) The suspension without pay; the reduction in pay shall be computed as one two hundred and sixtieth (1/260) of normal
salary per day of suspension;
(d) The suspension with pay; if and only if the
Vice-President, Academic cites the suspension with pay as a disciplinary measure. It is understood that where a
suspension with pay is non-disciplinary such suspension shall not be referenced as disciplinary in any subsequent
disciplinary actions;
(e) The dismissal for just cause as per Article 5.80
– Dismissal Procedures.
5.75.4 When a Dean/University Librarian is satisfied following an investigation that there is cause to write a formal
reprimand the Dean/University Librarian shall do so directly, although the Member has the right of review as per Article
5.70 – Personnel Files.
5.75.5 When the Vice-President, Academic is satisfied following an investigation that there is cause to suspend a
Member, the Vice-President, Academic shall do so by written communication to the Member, setting out therein the
reasons therefore.
5.75.6 Cases involving the inability of a Member to perform reasonable duties by reason of physical or mental
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 113

Collective Agreement 2008-11 illness shall be treated separately from cases for disciplinary measures. If sickness or
disability is proven, leave shall be granted and the case dealt with within the University sickness and disability provisions.
In exceptional cases when behaviour providing grounds for disciplinary measures is judged to be due to illness and the
Member refuses to be placed under the sickness and disability provisions of this Collective Agreement, disciplinary
procedures may be initiated.
5.75.7 Grievances regarding disciplinary measures against
Sessional Members shall be dealt with by the procedures in clause 4.40.7 of Article 4.40 –
Withdrawal of Seniority for Sessional Members.
ARTICLE 5.80 – DISMISSAL PROCEDURES
5.80.1 "Dismissal" means the termination for just cause of a term appointment or a probationary appointment before the
end of the stated contractual period, or the termination of a tenure appointment for just cause at any time other than
normal retirement. Neither the failure to renew a term or probationary appointment at the end of the defined term nor the
decision not to grant tenure, nor termination of an appointment for the purpose of retirement, provided these actions are in
accordance with this Collective Agreement, constitutes dismissal.
5.80.2 Just cause shall be defined as:
(a) Gross misconduct including serious unprofessional behaviour and/or misconduct constituting a grave and direct
violation of the personal safety of another Member, members of the University community and/or students of the
University community;
(b) Persistent failure to discharge academic responsibilities as defined in this Collective
Agreement either through incompetence or neglect of duties including persistent neglect of duty to students or scholarly
professional pursuits.
5.80.3 (a) Cases involving the inability of a Member to perform reasonable duties by reason of physical or mental illness
shall be treated separately from cases of dismissal for just cause.
(b) Where such inability has been established, leave shall be granted and the case dealt with
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 114

Collective Agreement 2008-11 within the University sickness and disability provisions set out in Article 7.55 – Physical and
Mental Illness
(c) If the Member refuses to comply with the requirements of the University's sickness and disability provisions, e.g.
refuses a medical examination required by the Employer pursuant to Article 7.55 – Physical and Mental
Illness or policies of the company carrying the insurance or refuses the leave associated with these procedures, the
President may proceed to lay dismissal charges.
(d) If the President proceeds with dismissal for just cause, it shall be a sufficient defence to prevent dismissal for the
Member to establish that failure to perform reasonable duties arose from physical or mental illness.
(e) If Members are on sickness or disability leave and consider that they have recovered and are capable of undertaking
normal academic activities, they shall present medical evidence from a medical practitioner to their
Dean/University Librarian. If the
Dean/University Librarian agrees, the
Members shall be reinstated with full rights and benefits forthwith. If the Dean/University
Librarian disagrees, the Dean/University
Librarian shall require the opinion of two (2) additional medical practitioners named by agreement with the Member or, if
there is no agreement, by the Ontario Medical
Association. The majority opinion of the three
(3) medical practitioners shall prevail. The
Employer shall pay the cost of such additional medical examinations required by it.
Procedure for Dismissal
5.80.4 Where the Dean/University Librarian is satisfied that there is just cause to warrant dismissal proceedings, the
Dean/University Librarian shall make a recommendation, in writing to the President.
5.80.5 The President of the University may, by written notice for stated just cause, suspend Members with pay in
accordance with Article 5.75 – Disciplinary Measures from some or all of their University duties and withdraw some or all
of their University privileges, excluding membership in Senate, pending the initiation of dismissal procedures or
procedures related to physical or mental incapacity to perform reasonable duties (see clause 5.80.3 above). The stated
cause for suspension with pay must involve a situation perceived by the President as an immediate threat to the
functioning of the University or to any
Member of the University and/or be for the purpose of
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 115

Collective Agreement 2008-11 initiating an investigation. The suspension with pay shall terminate with the conclusion of
the dismissal or other proceedings or at such earlier time as the
President may deem appropriate. At which time, on a finding of just cause, the Member may be dismissed.
Salary and other benefits shall continue throughout the period of suspension.
5.80.6 If the President is satisfied that there is a prima facie case the President shall initiate dismissal proceedings in the
following manner. The President shall notify the
Member of the Dean's/University Librarian's recommendation and request that the Member meet with the President and
such person as the President may wish for a discussion of the case. In this and all further proceedings, an advisor may
accompany the
Member. If this attempt fails to settle the matter, or if the Member refuses to meet with the President, the
Member shall be informed by the President, in writing, by registered mail, of the reasons for the dismissal proceedings
against the Member in sufficient detail to enable the Member to prepare a response.
5.80.7 If the Member's whereabouts are unknown to the
Employer and the Union, the meeting contemplated in clause 5.80.6 above shall be dispensed with and the
President may immediately give notice of dismissal by registered mail addressed to the Member's last known address.
5.80.8 The Union is entitled to carry forward a grievance on behalf of the Member commencing at step 2 of the grievance
procedure.
ARTICLE 5.85 – RESIGNATION
5.85.1 Normally a Member may resign effective June 30 or
December 30, with at least three (3) month's written notice to the Vice-President, Academic. All leaves to which a
resigning Member would be entitled must be terminated at that date.
5.85.2 Employment may be terminated at any time by mutual written agreement between a Member and the Vice-
President, Academic.
5.85.3 Effective January 1, 2009, faculty members on a leave of absence at another university shall be deemed to have
resigned six (6) months after they receive tenure at that institution.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 116

Collective Agreement 2008-11
ARTICLE 5.90 – RETIREMENT
5.90.1 Normal Retirement Date
For the purpose of the administration of the pension plan, the normal retirement date of a Member shall be the first (1st)
day of July next following the attainment of age sixty-five (65), unless the
Member's sixty-fifth (65th) birthday falls on the first
(1st) day of July, in which case the Normal
Retirement Date shall coincide with the Member's sixty-fifth (65th) birthday. However, in accordance with government
statutes, retirement is not mandatory at that time.
5.90.2 Optional Retirement Dates
(a) Early Retirement
Early retirement shall be governed by the regulations of the Laurentian University Pension Plan or if applicable by the
terms of the Appendix C – Special
Voluntary Early Retirement Plan.
(b) Retirement at Dates Other than July 1
Subject to 5.90.2 (a) above and in exceptional circumstances a Member may request and the
Pension Committee may approve the request, retirement, at a date other than July 1. In this instance, an annuity shall be
purchased as of the next date the Employer will have available to it the evaluation of the total fund as of the day preceding
- that is, October 1, January 1, and April 1.
If such a request is made approved and implemented, only that Member's share of the net growth of the fund to the day
preceding will be allocated.
5.90.3 Members retired from this University shall retain:
(a) The right to their title and the listing of their name and their title in a special section at the back of the University
Calendar, until the death of the Member.
(b) The same library privileges as full-time
Members, free parking in facilities available to full-time Members, and such other University facilities as may be granted
by the
Vice-President, Academic at her/his discretion.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 117

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(c) The same exemption from tuition fees for themselves, their spouses, and their dependants as full-time Members, as
per
Article 8.50 – Tuition Fee Exemption and
Spousal Library Card.
(d) The same eligibility for free Physical Education
Centre membership for themselves, their spouses and their dependants as full-time
Members, as per Article 8.60 – Physical
Education Facilities.
5.90.4 To honour an outstanding contribution in an academic field, the Employer may, in accordance with Senate policy,
bestow the title of Professor/Librarian Emeritus upon a retiring Member.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 118

Collective Agreement 2008-11
RESEARCH, CREATIVITY AND PROFESSIONAL
DEVELOPMENT
ARTICLE 6.10 – RESEARCH AND CREATIVITY
6.10.1 The Parties recognize that the common good of society depends upon the unfettered search for knowledge in all
fields of study and upon its free exposition. The Parties further acknowledge the importance of research and creativity and
the
Employer will make every reasonable effort to support both in a fair and equitable manner.
6.10.2 The University is an open environment for the pursuit of scholarly work. Academic freedom and critical inquiry
depend on the communication of the findings and results of intellectual investigation.
The Employer shall not interfere with a Member’s freedom to publish the results of scholarly inquiry and research, except
for limitations imposed by duly constituted university Research Ethics Boards.
ARTICLE 6.15 – RESEARCH, CREATIVITY AND
DEVELOPMENT OFFICE
6.15.1 The Research, Creativity and Development (RCD)
Office has been created to facilitate research and/or creativity for all Members and to ensure that the internal and external
regulations concerning research activities are properly applied. The work of the RCD Office shall be done in a constructive
manner to give better access to funding and research collaboration at the national and international level, while promoting
research activities and creativity at Laurentian University.
6.15.2 For internally or externally-funded grant applications requesting a pre-selection or an evaluation, the
Employer shall communicate the composition of the selection committee on the RCD Office website.
The participation of Faculty Members in the selection committee shall be encouraged where possible. None of the
members of the selection committee shall be involved in the grant or contract applications being reviewed pursuant to
Article 3.35
– Conflict of Interest.
6.15.3 Members of the Administration shall not be involved as investigators in internal research grants and if they are
investigators in externally-funded grants that are internally pre-selected, they shall not be part of the selection committee
pursuant to Article
3.35 – Conflict of Interest.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 119

Collective Agreement 2008-11
6.15.4 The Employer shall endeavour to inform faculty
Members of any external competitions requiring
Employer matching funds, the policies, selection criteria, and an estimation of the likelihood of success concerning such
competitions.
ARTICLE 6.20 – RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
SUPPORT
6.20.1 In order to attract and retain faculty Members, all new full-time Members with probationary or tenured appointments
shall receive a minimum Start-up
Grant of eight thousand dollars ($8,000).
6.20.2 Recipients of these awards shall have three (3) years to use the funds. After a three (3) year period, any unspent
amount shall be returned to the
Office of the Vice-President, Academic.
ARTICLE 6.25 – LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY RESEARCH
FUND (LURF)
6.25.1 For each of the years of the Collective Agreement, the Employer shall provide to the Associate Vice-
President, Research a research fund to enhance scholarly productivity through an open competition among Members:
Research Support (LURF) as follows:
2008-09 $140,000
2009-10 $150,000
2010-11 $160,000
In the event that faculty from federated or affiliated universities wish to apply, their applications shall only be considered if
their home institution has contributed to the LURF fund an amount per full- time member equivalent to that provided by the
Employer.
6.25.2 For each of the years of the Collective Agreement, the Employer will provide to the Associate Vice-
President, Research an additional twenty thousand dollars ($20,000) per year to support both research activities and
attendance at academic and professional conferences by retired Members, through an open competition. The Employer
will also provide active assistance to LUFA-R members making grant applications to NSERC, SSHRC, and
CHIR.
6.25.3 A LURF Committee of eight (8) full-time Members, one (1) from Humanities, one (1) from Social
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 120

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Sciences, two (2) from Professional Schools, two
(2) from Sciences and Engineering, one (1) from
Management and one (1) Librarian will evaluate the proposals submitted to the Research, Creativity and
Development (RCD) Office once a year. These
Members will be appointed by the Dean/University
Librarian in consultation with the Union for a two (2) year term.
6.25.4 The LURF Committee shall establish its own procedures, and develop criteria for the administration of the funds.
These criteria shall be just, equitable and consistent with the objective of nurturing and stimulating research at Laurentian
University. The rules of this yearly competition shall be clearly established in consultation and agreement with the Union
and shall not be modified without the approval of the Union. The approved rules shall be treated as a public document and
posted on the RCD Office website. The funding criteria for LURF shall not be limited to, or give priority to, salaries for
assistants.
6.25.5 While the LURF committee should determine the amount of funding for each competition, in no case shall that
amount of funding be greater than five thousand dollars ($5,000) per application. The total
LURF funding shall be allocated by Faculty/Library, proportionate to the numbers of full-time Members in each
Faculty/Library.
6.25.6 The University shall maintain records and deposit copies of all proceedings, statements and correspondence
related to the Committee's policies and the awarding of grants. This material will be made available to the Union upon
request, subject to any limitations in the Freedom of Information and
Personal Privacy Act. Applicants who are not funded by LURF should be given an explanation by the LURF Committee on
the reasons of the rejection.
6.25.7 Applicants whose applications are rejected by the
LURF committee shall have recourse to an appeals procedure only in the case of allegations of violations of academic
freedom, significant procedural irregularities or discrimination. Notice of an appeal must be submitted to the
Dean/University
Librarian and RCD Office no later than one (1) month after the applicant has been notified of the decision. Within one (1)
week of receiving notice of appeal, the RCD Office shall strike an Appeals
Committee. Members of the Appeals Committee should be selected in light of research experience and expertise. The
Committee will consist of:
One (1) member appointed by the Union;
One (1) appointment by the Associate Vice-
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 121

Collective Agreement 2008-11
President, Research; and
A Chair chosen by the two (2) appointed members.
6.25.8 The Appeals Committee shall establish its own procedures taking into account the provisions of this
Article and the published policies and procedures for grant applications of the LURF Committee.
Should the appeal be upheld, the appellant’s request will be funded if there are funds still available. If not, the appellant
will be given first priority for funding at the next competition.
6.25.9 The decision of the Appeals Committee shall be final and binding on all Parties. The Appeals
Committee shall communicate its decision and its reasons in writing to the appellant and the RCD
Office of within one (1) month of hearing the appeal.
6.25.10 A list of all awardees including the project title, the amount of funding and the duration of all projects shall be
published on the RCD Office website after each competition.
ARTICLE 6.30 – PATENTS
6.30.1 The Employer agrees that the Members have the unqualified right to publish their inventions. The
Employer further agrees that the Members have no obligation to modify their research to enhance patentability nor, unless
otherwise agreed, any obligation to seek patent protection for the results of their scientific work.
6.30.2 The Employer waives, disclaims and abandons any interest in or claims to any invention, improvement, design or
development made by a Member or
Members except where this has occurred with the use of the Employer's funds, personnel or equipment in which instance
the conditions set out in clause
6.30.4 hereof shall apply. Unless otherwise provided in this Article, any invention or any patent arising therefrom shall be
the sole property of the inventor.
6.30.3 The Members shall have the right to make their own arrangements at their own expense to patent an invention
subject to the obligations in this Article and shall be entitled to all the proceeds therefrom except where the invention was
made with the use of the
Employer's funds, personnel or equipment.
6.30.4 Where an invention, improvement, design or development was made by Members with the use of the Employer's
funds, personnel or equipment the
Members shall sign an agreement with the University before an application for patent is filed by them. This agreement
shall provide that the Employer shall assign all rights, title and interest in the invention, improvement, design or
development to the
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 122

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Members, subject to the University and the Members sharing equally in the "net proceeds" as used in this
Article shall mean the net profits derived from licensing or commercialisation of the patented product, equipment or
process after deduction of all expenses incurred in patent searches, for obtained patent protection and for maintaining
said protection in Canada and in other countries.
6.30.5 Members agree to disclose the existence of any patent applications to the Employer within three (3) months of the
date of the application unless otherwise provided for in this Article and shall affirm in writing at that time whether or not the
discovery has been made and developed with the use of
Employer's funds, personnel or equipment. The
Employer may within one (1) month of receipt of the statement of the Member challenge in writing the assertion of the
Member in regard to the circumstances of the discovery, in which case the matter shall be settled by arbitration as
detailed in
Article 11.15 – Arbitration Procedure. Any challenge by the Employer shall be null and void unless received within the
above noted time limit. If the
Member(s) fails to disclose the existence of patent applications within three (3) months, it shall be understood that the
Employer maintains its rights under this Article until such disclosure is made.
Failure by the Employer to challenge the assertion of the Member within one (1) month shall constitute a waiver of any
rights that the Employer may have had in such discovery.
6.30.6 For the purpose of interpreting clauses 6.30.2 to
6.30.5 above, payment of regular salary and benefits shall not be construed as use of the Employer's funds.
6.30.7 Members shall grant to the Employer a non-exclusive, royalty free, irrevocable, indivisible, and non-transferable
right to use solely for the
University 's internal use any patented device, equipment or process when such device, equipment or process has been
invented with the use of the
Employer's equipment, funds or support/technical personnel. Such right, however, shall not include the right to transfer or
exploit any product or process.
6.30.8 Where Members decide that they will not patent, produce or market an invention, improvement or discovery at their
own expense but consent to the
University patenting, producing or marketing the invention, before an application for patent is filed by the University, the
University shall negotiate an agreement with the Members. The agreement shall provide that the Members shall assign all
their rights, titles and interests in the invention, improvement or discovery to the University subject to the University and
the Members sharing equally in the "net
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 123

Collective Agreement 2008-11 proceeds" derived therefrom.
6.30.9 Without mutual agreement, the name of the
University shall not be used in connection with inventions in which the Employer has no interest.
6.30.10 Any revenue that the Employer may receive from inventions shall be dedicated to academic development and
research with at least fifty percent
(50%) of such income designated for academic development and research in the Faculty/Library with which the inventor is
affiliated. These funds shall be maintained in a special account, which shall be open to the inspection of the President of
the Union or the
President of the Union's designate.
6.30.11 The Employer agrees that it shall not enter any agreement to sub-contract work or responsibilities already
undertaken or possessed by the Employer and the Members without securing to the Members who may be seconded to
or be employed by the sub-contractor all the rights, privileges and benefits accorded to them in this patent Article of this
Collective Agreement. Nor shall the Employer enter into any agreement to create a consortia of universities or
government departments or private companies for the purposes of research or development or commercial exploitation
without securing to the Members who may be seconded to or employed by such consortia, departments or private
companies all the rights, privileges and benefits accorded by this Article. If the Employer makes an agreement contrary to
this provision and fails to secure the said rights, privileges and benefits to said
Members, the agreement shall not apply to Members unless there is a special agreement in writing between the Employer
and the Union to waive this clause of the Article.
ARTICLE 6.35 – COPYRIGHT
Copyright vested in the Member:
6.35.1 The Member who is the creator of any work including any printed material, computer programmes, on-line course
material, painting, sculpture, film, slide, tape or similar material shall retain the copyright therein unless otherwise stated in
this Article.
Copyright vested in the University:
6.35.2 The Parties agree that the University shall hold copyright to any work including any creative work, printed material,
computer programme, on-line course material, films, slides, tapes or similar materials produced by Members as part of
their normal workload for the University for use in its distance education courses. In all cases, the
University shall arrange for the development of these
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 124

Collective Agreement 2008-11 courses through a special contract with the
Members, which sets out terms in accordance with the terms in this Collective Agreement. Copies of all works subject to
the policy stated in this clause shall contain a statement or marking identifying the ownership of copyright, and with
appropriate credit, the contributors. A copy of the contract between the
Member and the University shall be sent to the
Union.
6.35.3 If the University requests a work including a creative work, printed material, films, slides, tapes, computer
programmes, on-line course material, or similar materials from a Member under special contract, then, in the absence of
any agreement to the contrary, the University shall be the first owner of the copyright therein. This includes all materials
for distance education courses. A Member entering into such a contract with the University shall be notified of the terms of
this clause prior to signing the contract.
The Union shall receive a copy of such notification.
6.35.4 All special contracts for distance education courses shall contain a clause which allows the contributors to use (for
their own classroom purposes) parts of any course that they have created provided that they shall not use such material in
another distance education course without the written permission of the University during the period in which the
University holds copyright to that material.
6.35.5 The master copy of any work whose copyright is vested in the University under the terms of this Article shall be the
property of the University. The University shall be responsible for the custody and control of such works and of any copies
thereof.
6.35.6 Where consent, fees or licenses are required for the use of incorporated materials in works in which the
University has copyright under the terms of this
Article, the contributor shall notify the University by provision of a list of works which require such clearance. The
University shall have the right to refuse to accept requests for copyright clearance, which are judged to be prohibitively
expensive.
6.35.7 The Members who are the authors of any work, whose copyright is vested in the University shall sign a warranty
that the work is original and that, to the best of their knowledge, it does not violate any existing copyright.
6.35.8 The offering of courses to which the University has copyright under the terms of this Article shall be at the
University's discretion.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 125

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Revision:
6.35.9 From time to time, the University may require revisions in works to which it holds the copyright in order to ensure
that proper and current academic standards are met.
6.35.10 Further, the author of work as defined in clauses
6.35.2 or 6.35.3 above may, at any time after three
(3) years of use, and at three (3) year intervals thereafter notify the University of the need to revise such a work. The
University and the Member shall negotiate the amount it will pay to defray the costs of such revisions including the
Member's fee.
6.35.11 The process of revision shall be regarded as the joint responsibility of the author of the work and the
University. If the author chooses not to undertake the revision or if the author has not accepted the
University's request for revision within one (1) month of receipt of that request or if the author is no longer an Employee of
the University, then the
Department/School shall choose an individual to make the required revisions. By so doing, the author shall not lose
contractual rights to any fees. Where the author is no longer an Employee of the
University, notice of the intention to revise and of the proposed revisions shall be sent to her/him by registered mail at the
last known address. In the event that the author and the University cannot agree on the nature or extent of the revisions,
the University may engage the services of someone approved by the Department/School to make the revisions.
6.35.12 The University shall negotiate a fee for any revisions that are made at the University's request.
6.35.13 In all cases where someone other than the authors make revisions to the work, if the authors object to the extent
or the propriety of the revisions, they may have their names withdrawn as contributors to the work and any visible
indication that they are contributors to the work shall be withdrawn. The authors must notify the University of their desire
to do so within one (1) month after receiving notice by registered mail of the proposed revisions.
Third Party use:
6.35.14 "Net proceeds" of any fees or royalties that the
University receives for the use by another Party of a work to which the University has copyright under the terms of this
Article shall be distributed in accordance with clause 6.35.15 hereof and the Member shall receive no additional payment.
"Net Proceeds" shall mean the fees and royalties received less the cost of reproduction, administration and distribution.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 126

Collective Agreement 2008-11
6.35.15 Net proceeds shall be distributed as follows:
(a) Until the original production costs have been recouped by the University, seventy-five percent (75%) to the University
and twenty- five percent (25%) to the author.
(b) After recovery of the original production costs, fifty percent (50%) to the University and fifty percent (50%) to the
author.
"Original production costs" include the normal tariff charges to produce the physical work including licensing costs of other
copyright material exploited in the work. An accounting of production costs shall be produced by the University if
requested by the
Member or by the Union.
Member's Copy:
6.35.16 If practicable the Members shall receive, upon request, a copy at a cost not exceeding the cost of the
tape/film/recording or other medium upon which the work has been produced of any work produced by them for the
University and to which the University holds copyright under the terms of this Collective
Agreement.
6.35.17 Should the University wish to erase or otherwise destroy part or all of a work to which it has copyright under the
terms of this Collective Agreement, the authors shall be given notice of such intention and shall have one (1) month in
which to make known their wish to receive a copy of the section (s) to be erased. If the authors express such a wish within
the time limit, they shall receive a copy of those sections at a cost not exceeding the cost of the tape/film/recording or
other medium upon which the work has been produced plus reasonable administrative costs arising therefrom.
ARTICLE 6.40 – COMMITTEE ON PATENTS AND
COPYRIGHT
6.40.1 The Parties agree to create a continuing Committee on Patents and Copyright, which shall be composed of two (2)
individuals appointed by the Employer and two (2) Members appointed by the Union, with the
Chairship alternating between the Employer's representatives and the Union's representatives at each successive
meeting.
6.40.2 The Committee shall meet at least twice annually to:
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 127

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(a) Conduct such business as is referred to it.
(b) Consider strategies for marketing inventions, improvements or discoveries.
(c) Recommend to the Joint Committee on the
Administration of the Collective Agreement any proposals for modifications or changes in the patents and copyright
articles of this
Collective Agreement.
(d) Mediate any disputes arising out of Article
6.30 – Patents and Article 6.35 – Copyright in accordance with clause 6.40.3 below.
6.40.3 Grievance and Arbitration
For the purposes of this Collective Agreement, any grievance by a Member pertaining to Article 6.30 –
Patents and/or Article 6.35 – Copyright shall be handled in accordance with the following procedure:
(a) The Member, within three (3) weeks of the event giving rise to the grievance or the date on which the Member knew or
reasonably should have known of such event if that date is later, shall present a grievance to the
Vice-President, Academic.
(b) Within two (2) weeks of receipt of the grievance, the Vice-President, Academic shall refer the matter to the continuing
Committee on Patents and Copyright and inform the
Union of such grievance. If the
Vice-President, Academic fails to refer the matter to the continuing Committee on
Patents and Copyright within the time limits, the Members shall be deemed to have succeeded in their grievance and the
results thereof shall be binding on the university.
(c) The continuing Committee on Patents and
Copyright, within one (1) month of the receipt of the grievance, shall make a recommendation for the resolution of the
grievance. The time limits may be extended by mutual agreement. If the committee fails to make a recommendation within
the time limits, the Vice-President, Academic may act as in paragraph 6.40.3 (d) below.
(d) The Vice-President, Academic within one (1) week of the receipt of the recommendations of the continuing Committee
on Patents and
Copyright or within one (1) week of the end of the time limits for action by the Committee shall render the Committee's
proposal in the matter and communicate it in writing to the
Parties concerned.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 128

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(e) If the proposal of the Vice-President,
Academic rendered pursuant to paragraph
6.40.3 (d) above does not resolve the grievance, the matter may be submitted to binding arbitration by one (1) arbitrator in
accordance with the grievance and arbitration procedures of this Collective Agreement.
ARTICLE 6.45 – PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
EXPENDITURES
6.45.1 In order to further the objectives of the University, the creation and dissemination of knowledge, the activities of
each full-time Member shall be supported by professional expenditures in each contractual year. The amount of these
expenditures shall be limited to two thousand two hundred dollars
($2,200) for the academic year 2008-09, two thousand two hundred and fifty dollars ($2,250) for the academic year
2009-10, and two thousand three hundred dollars ($2,300) for the academic year 2010-11.
6.45.2 Professional development expenditures allowable under this Article include the following:
(a) Membership fees for professional and/or learned societies related to the Member’s discipline.
(b) Subscriptions to professional and/or learned journals.
(c) Books, materials, equipment, and services directly related to research and teaching/professional Library work.
(d) Registration fees for the Member to attend a scholarly conference.
(e) Travel including transportation, food and accommodation (subject to University travel policies) for the Member to
attend relevant scholarly conferences or seminars, or to visit other universities or research sites to conduct research and
scholarly work which cannot be done at Laurentian University.
(f) Page and reprint charges or costs incurred in the preparation and completion of scholarly manuscripts.
(g) Professional/academic development or upgrading.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 129

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(h) Hiring part-time assistants in support of research and teaching, excluding marking.
6.45.3 Expenditures must be approved in advance by the
Dean/University Librarian and reimbursements will be made on verification of receipts. In the event that expenditures are
incurred in relatively small amounts - less than fifty percent (50%) of the total or less than the remaining maximum
allowable amount - reimbursements should be accumulated but receipts must be submitted not later than
January 1 or July 1 following the date the expenditures have been made.
6.45.4 Full-time Members who are on sabbatical leave, study leave, or voluntary reduced workload are eligible for the
professional development expenditures.
6.45.5 Any equipment purchased with funds provided under this Article remains the property of the
University but a Member shall have the right if she/he so chooses to buy back such equipment at fair market value.
6.45.6 Any unused portion of the maximum allowed for professional development can be carried forward for two (2) years
only.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 130

Collective Agreement 2008-11
LEAVES
ARTICLE 7.10 – RECOGNIZED AND OTHER HOLIDAYS
7.10.1 The following days and all days generally declared to be recognised holidays by Federal or Provincial authorities
are recognised holidays and paid time off shall therefore be given to the Members on:
(a) Founder's Day, Good Friday, Easter Monday,
Victoria Day, Canada Day, August Civic
Holiday, Labour Day, Thanksgiving Day,
Christmas Day, Boxing Day, New Year's Day.
(b) And on such other holidays as declared by the Employer, including the customary
Christmas recess.
ARTICLE 7.15 – VACATION
7.15.1 Vacation is the period during which a Member is not accountable to the University.
7.15.2 In addition to recognised holidays, each Member is entitled to a vacation of twenty-five (25) working days, after
eleven (11) months of service and annually thereafter. Members on contracts of less than one (1) year duration are
entitled to a pro-rated period of vacation. When Members have accumulated five (5) full consecutive years of employment
at the University, for each year of employment thereafter they shall be entitled to an additional two (2) days of vacation to
a maximum entitlement of thirty-five (35) working days.
7.15.3 The Members will be paid during vacation periods but there shall be no remuneration in lieu of vacation in the
event that the Members choose not to take their vacation allowance.
7.15.4 The Members are required to take the vacation to which they are entitled. Vacation may not be accumulated from
year to year. The Members are required to take their vacation between Spring
Convocation and Labour Day, unless prior permission has been granted by the Dean/University
Librarian. Members may take their annual vacation at any time within that period provided that:
(a) The period of the vacation does not conflict with a time during which the Members have scheduled duties assigned to
them.
(b) The Members have indicated the dates of their vacation to the Dean/University
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 131

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Librarian, through their Chair/Director at least one (1) month in advance.
7.15.5 In the event of the death of Members, the value of any unused vacation entitlement will be paid to their beneficiary.
7.15.6 Members retiring, resigning or whose limited-term appointment expires but who are unable to take their full
vacation entitlement shall be paid vacation pay as follows:
(a) Members retiring or resigning or whose limited-term appointments expire on June 30 shall be paid a number of
working days equal to their vacation entitlement minus the number of working days in June that fall after the deadline for
submission of final grades.
Members are considered to be on vacation starting on the first working day after Spring
Convocation.
(b) Members retiring or resigning on December
31 shall be paid a number of working days equal to their vacation entitlement minus the number of working days that fall
after the deadline of submission of final grades for three (3) credit courses and mid-term grades for six (6) credit courses,
and December 31
(c) Members with limited-term appointments whose appointment expires on dates other than June 30 shall be paid a
number of working days equivalent to their vacation entitlement minus the number of working days that fall after the
deadline for submission of final grades and the date of the expiry of the term contract.
(d) The daily rate applied to the entitlements
(paragraphs 7.15.6 (a) to (c) above) shall be one two hundred and sixtieth (1/260) of the
Member’s salary.
ARTICLE 7.20 – ABSENCE - GENERAL
7.20.1 The University as a community of scholars requires the availability of its Members on a regular and on-going basis
to ensure that the activities of the
University scheduled and unscheduled can be carried out in an orderly manner.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 132

Collective Agreement 2008-11
7.20.2 Any absence shall not normally interfere with assigned and/or scheduled activities and the harmonious functioning
of the Department/School.
7.20.3 Any absence from campus affecting teaching/professional librarian duties shall be governed by Article 5.15 –
Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of Academics.
7.20.4 From Labour Day to Spring Convocation absences of more than one (1) week require notification to the
Chair/Director and permission of the Dean/University
Librarian. Shorter absences require notification to the Chair/Director. When scheduled or assigned duties are affected by
an absence, Members shall make suitable arrangements through their
Chair/Director who shall advise the Dean/University
Librarian when the absence has a significant impact on the Member's duties.
7.20.5 From Spring Convocation to Labour Day,
Departments/Schools must maintain a fair and equitable system to assure a reasonable presence sufficient to administer
the Department/School, to deal with correspondence and to maintain on-going availability for student counselling and
other unscheduled issues as they may from time to time arise. Absences during this period must be in accordance with
this system. For any absences of more than a week, prior written permission shall be obtained from the Dean/University
Librarian who shall not unreasonably withhold such permission.
7.20.6 Except where Members are on vacation, leave or other approved absence they must remain in communication with
their Department/School so that it is reasonably possible for the University to contact and/or recall them on short notice.
7.20.7 It may in exceptional cases, be necessary for the
University to recall a Member who is on vacation, leave or formally approved absence as defined in clause 7.20.5 above.
The University will not do so arbitrarily or unreasonably. In such cases, the
University will bear reasonable transportation costs consequent upon any such recall.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 133

Collective Agreement 2008-11
ARTICLE 7.25 – SABBATICAL LEAVES
7.25.1 Preamble
In recognition of the fact that full-time Members are required to continue to develop as scholars and researchers
throughout their careers, the University maintains a policy of sabbatical leave intended for academic study, research or
writing which will be mutually beneficial to the Member and the institution. For this purpose, sabbatical leave is defined as
a period during which a Member is relieved of normal duties in order to:
(a) Engage in further training, advanced studies or courses at a study or research centre, including language study.
(b) Devote more time to scientific or creative work.
(c) Improve the University's relations with other universities or countries in the capacity of a visiting professor or visiting
librarian.
(d) Gain practical or professional experience in a field connected with the Members' academic or professional
specialization which will enable them to give instruction or, in the case of the library, service that is more complete and
suitable to the requirements of the time.
Members who are on sabbatical leave and who elect to remain on campus for all or part of the duration of the leave shall
not normally be assigned any formal workload nor shall they normally participate in any formal activities of the University
other than those required by this Collective
Agreement. Members who have indicated in their sabbatical plan their intent to spend part or all of their sabbatical leave
on campus are entitled to suitable office space on campus. Sabbaticants required to move their offices shall have all
moving and storage expenses paid by the Employer. The
Employer will replace Members on sabbatical leave when it deems it necessary. The Employer retains the right to limit the
number granted leave in keeping with its academic responsibilities.
7.25.2 Eligibility
Eligibility for sabbatical leave is subject to the following conditions:
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 134

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(a) Members must have been full-time faculty
Members of the University for the past six (6) consecutive years, holding the rank of Full
Professor/Librarian, Associate
Professor/Librarian, and Assistant
Professor/Librarian at the time of application.
They must be tenured at the time their sabbatical leave begins. In exceptional circumstances tenured Lecturers/General
Librarians with the requisite years at
Laurentian are also eligible for sabbatical if they have the approval of the
Dean/University Librarian to apply. Where the leave is to be used for upgrading, the
University shall give special consideration to employment equity goals. Faculty Members' service for purposes of
sabbatical leave eligibility shall be calculated from the date of their initial full-time appointment by the
University or from the date of their last sabbatical leave, whichever is later. When
Members take a sabbatical leave, all accumulated years of eligibility entitlement are exhausted unless otherwise provided
for in this Collective Agreement. Time spent on sabbatical leave, study leave, or leave without pay does not count towards
sabbatical eligibility. Sabbatical leave will not be automatic and shall be granted following an approved application
procedure, outlined below.
(b) In order to attract qualified faculty, the Vice-
President, Academic may from time to time grant credit towards a sabbatical leave for full-time faculty service at another
University, including service at a Federated or Affiliated
College of a University. Such entitlement will be specified in the initial letter of appointment.
(c) Under special circumstances, the Members may make application for leave one (1) year prior to the year in which they
would normally become eligible to take sabbatical leave. If sabbatical leave is granted in this instance, the Members will
receive a stipend of eighty percent (80%) of their salary.
(d) In the interests of effective scheduling of a
Department’s/School’s course offerings, the
Dean/University Librarian may request that
Members apply for their sabbatical leave after the completion of five (5) years. The
Dean/University Librarian shall make the
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 135

Collective Agreement 2008-11 request by May 1 of the academic year preceding the year in which the Members are being
requested to apply for sabbatical leave, and the Members shall respond to the
Dean's/University Librarian's request by
June 1. Should the Members accept, the
Members shall submit a sabbatical plan by
September 30 to the Chair/Director of the
Department/School, as per paragraph 7.25.3
(b) below. Should Members accept, and if the application is approved, the Members shall receive a stipend of eighty-five
percent
(85%) of their salary during the sabbatical leave.
7.25.3 Application
(a) Each Dean/University Librarian shall maintain and annually revise, in consultation with the Department/School, a
sabbatical eligibility plan for each Department/School, the purpose of which is solely to assist in the orderly planning of
sabbatical leaves. Copies of the plan will be distributed by July 1 of each year to the Chair/Director who shall forward one
to each Department/School
Member.
(b) Applications for sabbatical leave shall be submitted by the Members to their
Dean/University Librarian with a copy to
Chair/Director of the Department/School no later than September 30 of the academic year preceding.
(c) The Dean/University Librarian shall make her/his recommendation to the Vice-
President, Academic no later than November
15 of the academic year preceding that in which the leave is to be taken. After verifying the status of the application in
relation to criteria defined in clauses 7.25.1 and 7.25.2 above, and after taking into consideration the recommendation of
the Dean/University
Librarian, the Vice-President, Academic shall reach a decision and shall transmit it to the
Member no later than December 15 of the academic year preceding that in which the leave is to be taken.
(d) The Vice-President, Academic shall base her/his decision to approve or not to approve a sabbatical plan on the
academic merits of the sabbatical leave project and its value to the professional development of the Member and to the
University.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 136

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(e) Should Members wish to make subsequent changes in their sabbatical plan, they shall submit the proposed changes
to their respective Dean/University Librarian for prior approval. If the proposed changes are not approved by the
Dean/University Librarian after consultation with the
Department/School, Members may ask that they be submitted to the Vice-President,
Academic for approval.
(f) The Dean/University Librarian may refer back the application submitted by the
Member as per paragraph 7.25.3 (b) above or the application for change as per paragraph 7.25.3 (e) above. If referred
back, the applicant shall consider the
Dean/University Librarian's suggestions and will re-submit a new application within ten
(10) working days.
7.25.4 Postponement
(a) In the event that it is necessary on financial and/or program grounds for the
Dean/University Librarian to require postponement of a sabbatical leave, the
Members shall be informed by July 1 of the academic year preceding that in which the sabbatical is to be taken. Such a
postponement shall not be required unreasonably. In such a case, Members shall receive an additional five percent (5%)
of their regular salary for the year of postponement as "stipend" during their sabbatical year and shall receive one (1) year
of sabbatical credit for the year postponed so that their next sabbatical leave will occur according to their original
sabbatical rotation. A sabbatical leave cannot be postponed for more than three (3) years on financial or program
grounds.
(b) (i) In the event that Members wish to postpone application for leave, they shall do so only for valid reasons, and
permission to do so shall be sought from the appropriate Dean/University
Librarian no later than May 1 immediately preceding the deadline for application specified in paragraph
7.25.3 (b) above. Such permission shall not be unreasonably withheld.
Should Members with a sabbatical leave confirmed by the Vice-
President, Academic wish to postpone the leave for valid reasons, permission shall be sought from the
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 137

Collective Agreement 2008-11 appropriate Dean/University Librarian at least two (2) months prior to the planned
commencement of such leave. Such permission shall not be unreasonably withheld.
(ii) If postponement of application for leave or of approved leave is approved, such Members do not have right of
precedence over colleagues in the
Department’s/School’s sabbatical leave plan. Such Members shall receive one (1) year of sabbatical credit for the year
postponed so that their next sabbatical leave will occur according to their original sabbatical rotation. In no case may such
a postponement be for more than one
(1) year.
(c) In the event that a Member’s tenure process is delayed for reasons of illness, pregnancy, parental or adoption leave,
such Members shall receive one (1) year of sabbatical credit for the year delayed so that their next sabbatical leave will
occur according to their original sabbatical rotation.
(d) Except in extenuating circumstances, where
Members postpone a sabbatical leave without formal approval, they lose the right of precedence over colleagues in the
Department’s/School’s sabbatical leave plan.
Should such Members be required by the
Dean/University Librarian on financial and/or program grounds to postpone their sabbatical leave in the following
academic year, they shall not be entitled to any additional remuneration.
(e) Except in extenuating circumstances, where
Members fail to apply for sabbatical leave for which they are eligible to apply, they shall not be entitled to any additional
remuneration should they be required to postpone their sabbatical leave in the following academic year on financial and/or
program grounds.
(f) If Members' sabbatical proposals are rejected on academic grounds by the Vice-
President, Academic and/or Arbitration
Board, they are entitled to apply the following year, but they are not entitled to any additional remuneration.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 138

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(g) Deadlines may be waived by agreement of the Parties.
7.25.5 Duration
Members may elect a sabbatical leave for a period of:
(a) Six (6) months normally commencing either on the first (1st) day of July or the first (1st) day of January. or
(b) Twelve (12) months normally commencing on the first (1st) day of July or such other date as agreed to by their
respective
Dean/University Librarian. Such agreement shall not be unreasonably withheld.
7.25.6 Remuneration
(a) A Member taking a six (6) month sabbatical leave after six (6) years of accumulated sabbatical credit is entitled to full
salary.
(b) Members taking a twelve (12) month sabbatical leave after six (6) years of accumulated sabbatical credit are entitled
to a stipend equivalent to eighty-five percent
(85%) of the salary they would normally have received.
(c) Upon the Member's request, the University will provide a portion of the sabbatical leave stipend as a research grant
subject to provincial and federal regulations. A Member who receives such a research grant from the
University must make the necessary deductions and declarations as applicable under either the federal or provincial laws.
The University accepts no responsibility in this regard.
(d) A Member on sabbatical leave shall not take other paid appointments without the prior written permission of the
Dean/University
Librarian. Such permission shall not be unreasonably withheld. Normally, any additional remuneration received during the
leave will be limited to an amount which brings a Member's total to one hundred percent (100%) of normal salary, plus
travel and related expenses for the Member's spouse and dependant children. Where total remuneration exceeds this
amount, the
University reserves the right to reduce the
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 139

Collective Agreement 2008-11 sabbatical stipend proportionately.
(e) Members who will have accumulated unused sabbatical credit by the time of their normal retirement date will be
entitled to apply for a sabbatical leave to occur during their penultimate year before retirement, and on the understanding
that they will return to the
University for their final year. Should sabbatical leave be granted in such circumstances, Members are entitled to a
stipend pro-rated on the basis of the normal sabbatical stipend and shall include entitlement for the year of return. At their
discretion, the Dean/University Librarian may agree to pro-rate the period of time taken as sabbatical leave in lieu of a
pro-rated stipend.
7.25.7 Benefits
(a) During the period of sabbatical leave, the
Member shall continue to receive all benefits as per Article 8.45 – Benefits subject to the conditions set out therein.
(b) During a sabbatical leave, pension calculations shall be based on the Member's salary that would have been in effect if
the
Member had not been on sabbatical.
7.25.8 Vacation
All Members on sabbatical leave will be assumed to have used their prior year's annual vacation entitlement during the
period July 1 to June 30 of the academic year in which the sabbatical leave is taken. Furthermore, Members who take a
six (6) month sabbatical leave shall be deemed to have taken half of their annual vacation entitlement during the actual
period of the sabbatical leave.
Members will be entitled to one (1) year's vacation entitlement after June 30 of the year in which the sabbatical leave is
completed.
7.25.9 Return
(a) Members granted sabbatical leave shall undertake to return to the University to resume their responsibilities as a
full-time
Member of faculty for the period of at least one (1) year. Failure to return to the
University shall require the Member to reimburse the University for all of the salary and benefits received during the leave,
except as such obligations may be waived
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 140

Collective Agreement 2008-11 by the University.
However, when a Member is planning to retire in the academic year immediately following the Member’s sabbatical leave,
the
Employer may waive the requirement to return to her/his responsibilities. Also, to facilitate earlier retirement, the Employer
and the Member may agree to an early sabbatical leave as per paragraph 7.25.2 (c) above without financial penalty
following which the Member retires and is not required to return to her/his responsibilities. In both these situations,
agreement of the Employer is required.
(b) Members must prepare and forward to their
Dean/University Librarian, within one (1) month of their return, a full written account of their scholarly and professional
activities and accomplishments as per the approved sabbatical plan during the leave. Members may make a written
request to the
Dean/University Librarian for a delay in the date of submission of their report. This report shall become part of their file to
be used in evaluating the Member for salary increments and promotions. Failure of a Member to submit the sabbatical
report by the specified time limit without adequate explanation may result in the delay of the decision whether to award or
deny the annual increment as per clause 8.20.11 of Article 8.20 – Procedures for the Award/Denial of a
Progress-Through-
The-Ranks Increment.
Members who are not eligible for an annual increment must have their report submitted within one (1) month of their
return in order to begin to accumulate sabbatical credit without penalty. When Members fail to do so, sabbatical credit
shall not begin to accumulate until January 1 or July 1, whichever is the closest date next following submission of the
report. If, after reviewing the report, the Dean/University Librarian finds the performance to be unsatisfactory, appropriate
measures may be taken, as provided in Article 5.75 – Disciplinary
Measures and 5.80 – Dismissal Procedures.
(c) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph
7.25.9 (a) above, the University may grant up to a maximum of one (1) year of study leave to Members immediately
following the completion of their sabbatical leave provided
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 141

Collective Agreement 2008-11 that during this sabbatical leave the
Members were studying to obtain a
Doctorate, and the additional year of leave will allow them to continue the program for the Doctorate. Under exceptional
circumstances, upon recommendation of the
Member's Dean/University Librarian and with the permission of the Vice-President,
Academic, the study leave may be extended for an additional year. This back-to-back sabbatical/study leave shall be
granted to
Members only once in their academic career. The Members shall receive a stipend, according to the provisions of Article
7.30 – Study Leave during this study leave, and must return to the University for a period equal to the total leave or, in the
alternative, reimburse the University for the full amount of the stipend and benefits received during the period of combined
sabbatical/study leave.
The Member may request an altered pattern for the payment of the combined sabbatical/study leave stipends provided
that the payment in any one year may not exceed the stipend originally awarded for the sabbatical year.
7.25.10 Disability
In the event that a Member on sabbatical leave becomes unable to fulfil the sabbatical obligations because of disability
the following policies and procedures shall apply.
(a) The Member will advise the Dean/University
Librarian, as soon as possible under the circumstances, of the disability and will provide the Dean/University Librarian with
a physician's report outlining the extent of the disability and if possible the expected date of return. For the duration of the
illness the provisions of Article 7.55 – Physical and
Mental Illness shall apply.
(b) In the event that the sabbaticant is disabled from performing her/his tasks for less than fifty percent (50%) of the
sabbatical leave, the Member shall be deemed to have taken her/his sabbatical leave. The Member shall submit a report
on her/his sabbatical activities on completion of the sabbatical leave or at the end of the sick leave, whichever occurs
later. The impact of the illness on the sabbatical plan of the Member shall be taken into consideration at evaluation time.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 142

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(c) In the event that the Member is disabled from performing her/his tasks for more than fifty percent (50%) of the
sabbatical leave, the Member shall be deemed not to have taken a sabbatical leave. The Member shall be eligible to take
her/his sabbatical leave at the first mutually acceptable time. If the
Member indicates that she/he will carry out the previously approved sabbatical plan then the Dean/University Librarian, on
the advice of the Department/School and in consultation with the Member, will determine the date on which the sabbatical
leave will commence. In the event that the Member wishes to amend the sabbatical plan, the provisions of paragraph
7.25.3 (f) above shall apply.
7.25.11 Sabbatical Leave After Three Years
While sabbaticals after six (6) years are the norm, the Parties recognize that outside of the sabbatical eligibility plan,
which will take precedence, it may be mutually beneficial to Members and the University if
Members were to take a six (6) month sabbatical at eighty-five percent (85%) salary after three (3) years of service. For
each six (6) months of service beyond three (3) years the sabbaticant is eligible for an additional two and a half percent
(2.5%) of salary during the leave period. In no case may a proposed or approved sabbatical leave after three
(3) years be postponed for more than one (1) year.
When Members take a sabbatical leave after three
(3) years all accumulated years of eligibility are exhausted except as otherwise provided for by this
Collective Agreement. When the sabbatical leave is postponed, the Member shall receive one (1) year sabbatical credit
for the year postponed so that their next sabbatical leave will occur according to their original sabbatical rotation.
Sabbaticals after three
(3) years can be granted provided that:
Eligibility
(a) Members have tenure when the leave becomes effective.
(b) Such a leave does not require the postponement of a sabbatical leave for a
Member with six (6) or more years of service.
(c) The leave does not have a negative impact on the budget of the Department/School.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 143

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Return
(a) Members granted sabbatical leave under this Article shall undertake to return to the
University to resume responsibilities as a full-time Member of faculty for the period of at least six (6) months. Failure to
return to the University shall require the Member to reimburse the University for all of the salary and benefits received
during the leave, except as such obligations may be waived by the University.
However, when a Member is planning to retire in the academic year immediately following the Member’s sabbatical leave,
the
Employer may waive the requirement to return to her/his responsibilities. Also, to facilitate earlier retirement, the Employer
and the Member may agree to an early sabbatical leave as per paragraph 7.25.2 (c) above without financial penalty
following which the Member retires and is not required to return to her/his responsibilities. In both these situations, the
Employer has to agree.
(b) Members must prepare and forward to their
Dean/University Librarian and Chair/Director of the Department/School, within one (1) month of their return, a full written
account of their scholarly and professional activities and accomplishments as per the approved sabbatical plan during the
leave, as outlined in paragraph 7.25.9 (b) above.
ARTICLE 7.30 – STUDY LEAVES
A leave for the purpose of upgrading academic qualifications, normally through the attainment of a higher degree or some
other equivalent acceptable to the University and the Department/School shall be known as Study Leave. Such leave
must be in the best interests of the University. The maximum length of leaves to be granted during a Member's academic
career shall normally not exceed two (2) years.
7.30.1 Eligibility
A study leave may be granted to a tenured, probationary or Permanent Sessional Member after two (2) years of full-time
service, but no sooner than two (2) years after a sabbatical leave except as permitted in paragraph 7.25.9 (c) of Article
7.25 –
Sabbatical Leaves. Such leave will not be automatic and shall be granted only upon the approval by the
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 144

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Vice-President, Academic, subsequent to consultation with the Department/School through its
Chair/Director and the appropriate Dean/University
Librarian, upon an approved application procedure noted below. In the event that the Employer is unable to grant a study
leave to an applicant in one (1) given year, the Employer shall make every reasonable effort to ensure that the study leave
is granted to the
Member in the subsequent year of application.
7.30.2 Application
(a) Applications for study leave shall be made by
September 30 in consultation with the
Department/School through the Chair/Director and the appropriate Dean/University Librarian to the Vice-President,
Academic. In submitting an application for study leave, the
Members shall provide a well-considered plan indicating the value of the leave to their professional improvement and to
the best interest of the University. In forwarding the application to the Dean/University Librarian, the Department/School
through the
Chair/Director shall recommend for or against approval, including in the recommendation not only an assessment of the
project but also a judgement on how the leave, if granted, will affect the academic program(s) and the budget of the
particular Department/School.
In forwarding the application to the
Vice-President, Academic, the
Dean/University Librarian shall make an assessment of the application on the same grounds. The Dean/University
Librarian will, at the Dean/University Librarian's discretion, make whatever inquiry they deem desirable, including
consideration of the applicant's demonstrated potential, in order to determine the merit of the application. Copies of both
the Department/School's and the
Dean’s/University Librarian's recommendations shall be made available to the applicant.
(b) Applications for study leave shall be filed with the Vice-President, Academic no later than
October 31 of the academic year preceding that in which the leave is to be taken. The
Vice-President, Academic shall verify the status of the application in relation to the relevant University policies and the
financial implications of the leave, and make a decision, a copy of which shall be sent to the
Member. The decision of the Vice-President,
Academic shall be final and binding.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 145

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(c) In the event that the Vice-President,
Academic finds it necessary to refuse
Members their study leave on financial grounds after the leave had been approved, that Member shall be given priority
within the
Member's Department/School for a study leave for the following year.
(d) Deadlines listed above may be waived in special circumstances.
7.30.3 Terms
(a) A one (1) year study leave may be granted to a tenured, probationary or Permanent
Sessional Member after two (2) years of service at a stipend of thirty-five thousand
($35,000) or a pro-rated amount if the leave is for a period of less than one (1) year.
(b) A two (2) year study leave may be granted to a tenured, probationary or Permanent
Sessional Member after four (4) years of service at a stipend of thirty-five thousand
($35,000) per year.
(c) A Member may request a temporary reduction in workload to undertake or complete Doctoral studies. Where, in the
discretion of the Vice-
President, Academic and upon recommendation of the Dean/University
Librarian, satisfactory replacement arrangements can be made, the workload reduction will be granted with a
proportionate reduction in salary based on the overload stipend.
(d) The maximum period of absence is two (2) consecutive years, normally commencing on
July 1.
(e) In the event that Members wish to pursue a summer course for upgrading purposes, they may request up to four (4)
weeks at full pay if they contribute equal time from their vacation period without losing any of their study leave entitlement.
To apply for such a leave,
Members will follow the procedures set out in clause 7.30.2 above.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 146

Collective Agreement 2008-11
7.30.4 Benefits
Benefits of insurance, pension, etc., will continue during the leave provided the Members continue payment of their
portion of the fees.
7.30.5 Return
(a) The Members must agree in writing to return immediately to the University for a period equal to their leave of absence
but in no case for a period of less than one (1) year or to reimburse the University for the full amount of the stipend
received. If Members return to the University for a period of time less than the length of the leave, the University shall
require the Members to reimburse the
University for all or part of their stipend received during the leave.
(b) The Members must prepare and forward to their Dean/University Librarian and
Chair/Director of the Department/School, within one (1) week of their return, a full written account of their scholarly
activities during the study leave. The report shall become part of their personnel file.
(c) Time spent on study leave does not count towards sabbatical credit.
7.30.6 Appointments while on Leave
All Members on study leave must obtain written approval in advance from the Dean/University
Librarian for any paid activity before making any such commitment.
ARTICLE 7.35 – VOLUNTARY REDUCED WORKLOAD
7.35.1 The Employer and the Union endorse the principle of voluntary reduced workload as being mutually beneficial to
the Members and the institution. Any full-time Member of the Bargaining Unit who currently occupies a regular full-time
position and who has a minimum of two (2) years of continuous full-time service at the University at their request may be
granted up to fifty percent (50%) temporary reduction in workload with a proportionate reduction in salary, and annual
vacation entitlement, provided that:
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 147

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(a) The temporary reduction is effective for a twelve (12) month period.
(b) The request is normally made to the
Department/School and the Dean/University
Librarian three (3) months in advance.
(c) The Dean/University Librarian approves the request, such approval not to be unreasonably withheld.
7.35.2 Notwithstanding paragraph 7.35.1 (a) above, the
University may, upon request, grant voluntary reduced workloads for periods longer than twelve
(12) months and/or renewals of twelve (12) month reduction periods, subject to the Dean’s/University
Librarian's approval as in paragraph 7.35.1 (c) above.
7.35.3 Faculty Members on Voluntary Reduced Workload have the right to benefits and to contribute to the benefits plan
of the University in accordance with the provisions of the Collective Agreement for sharing contributions.
(a) Sick leave. Members will be covered for periods of sick leave to the extent of the actual salary paid during that period
as per
Article 7.55 – Physical and Mental Illness.
(b) Long-Term Disability. Members who are planning to take a voluntary reduced workload must be provided with specific
information concerning coverage for Long-Term Disability during and after the period of voluntary reduced workload.
Members should not accept voluntary reduced workload without a full and complete written statement concerning
Long-Term Disability coverage.
(c) Pension Plan. Members on voluntary reduced workload may contribute to the pension plan on the basis of their normal
full salary with appropriate contributions from the
Employee and Employer as outlined in the
Collective Agreement to the extent possible under Revenue Canada regulations. It is understood that contributions based
on normal salary rather than reduced salary may
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 148

Collective Agreement 2008-11 not be possible under Revenue Canada regulations for a cumulative total of more than five
(5) years.
(d) Life Insurance. Life insurance may be carried based on the Member's normal salary and normal maximum.
(e) Sabbatical Leave. Sabbatical leave entitlements for Members on voluntary reduced workload will be pro-rated in
accordance with the reduced workload.
7.35.4 Members who use this option shall remain Members of the Bargaining Unit, notwithstanding the definition of
Membership as defined in Article 2.15 –
Recognition of the Bargaining Unit.
7.35.5 For the application of tenure and promotion policies, periods of reduced workload shall be pro-rated in accordance
with the reduction in workload. Full-time research and teaching activities at another institution while a Member is on
voluntary reduced workload at
Laurentian will be counted for purposes of the minimum time requirement for promotion.
7.35.6 Members on voluntary reduced workload retain both the right and the obligation to contribute to the administrative
work of the University. Evaluations of such activity by the Dean/University Librarian would be expected to recognise the
reduced workload of the Member. As full-time Members of the Bargaining
Unit, Members on voluntary reduced workload retain the right to participate in academic councils as full voting Members
and to receive minutes and other
Departmental/School and University documents and communications if the Member can be present on campus. If
Members are absent from campus, the
University is not required to undertake extraordinary steps to assure the ability of the Member to fully participate.
7.35.7 During the period of voluntary reduced workload,
Members are expected to submit annual reports as per Article 5.45 – Annual Report for Members in order to qualify for
Progress-Through-The-Ranks increments (Article 8.15 – Progress-Through-The-
Ranks Increments and Article 8.20 – Procedures for the Award/Denial of a Progress-Through-The-Ranks
Increment). The evaluation will take into account the reduced workload. If awarded, the Progress-
Through-The-Ranks increment will be added to the
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 149

Collective Agreement 2008-11 base salary of the Member. The new base salary will be used to determine the actual
salary of the
Member in conformity with the percent reduction in workload.
ARTICLE 7.40 – LEAVES OF ABSENCE WITHOUT PAY
7.40.1 A Member may be granted a leave of absence without pay under terms approved by the University.
All such terms including arrangements for benefits shall be set out in written form prior to the leave. All terms shall be
communicated in written form to the
Union for information prior to the leave. Permission for such leave shall not be unreasonably denied by the Employer.
7.40.2 An application for such leave shall normally be submitted in writing to the Dean/University Librarian at least six (6)
months in advance stating the purpose of the leave. An application for an extension should be made in writing to the
Dean/University Librarian at least four (4) months in advance. These time requirements may be waived in special
circumstances.
7.40.3 Applications for such leaves shall be recommended by the Dean/University Librarian after consultation with the
Department/School. Final approval rests with the Vice-President, Academic.
7.40.4 Leave of absence without pay under this Article shall normally not exceed two (2) years.
7.40.5 The Members may elect to discontinue the benefits during the leave of absence subject to existing policies and
regulations. If they elect to continue those benefits available to the Members, they shall make suitable arrangements as
defined in clause
7.40.1 above.
7.40.6 Court and Political leaves shall be governed by
Article 7.45 – Court Leaves and Article 7.50 –
Political Leaves.
ARTICLE 7.45 – COURT LEAVES
7.45.1 Leave of absence with pay shall normally be granted to any Member, other than a Member on leave of absence
without pay, who is required to serve on a jury or to attend as a witness or an expert in a court of justice or before any
legal or statutory body in
Canada with power to compel the attendance of witnesses before it.
7.45.2 The Members shall notify their Dean/University
Librarian in advance, in writing, and shall provide proof of their attendance, if so requested.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 150

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Members shall attempt to make arrangements to ensure that their duties are properly carried out during the period of their
absence.
7.45.3 Leave with pay does not apply to Members serving a sentence or appearing as a witness on their own behalf.
7.45.4 When Members wish time off in order to pursue a civil action in court, the Members shall apply to the
Dean/University Librarian for leave of absence without pay. (See Article 7.40 – Leaves of Absences
Without Pay.)
7.45.5 If Members are required to absent themselves from their duties to appear in court as a result of legal action taken
against them in regard to matters arising out of the performance of their duties to the
University, they shall not be penalised for such absence. Such an absence shall be governed by clause 7.45.2 above.
ARTICLE 7.50 – POLITICAL LEAVES
7.50.1 The Employer recognises that all Members of the
Bargaining Unit are free to enter public life and to seek any political office, as a member of the provincial or federal
government, or any full-time political office.
7.50.2 If Members of the Bargaining Unit wish to allow their names to stand either before a party convention or for actual
nomination for an election, the Members shall notify the Dean/University Librarian concerned within a reasonable time so
that the Dean/University
Librarian may make whatever arrangements may be deemed necessary in order to ensure that the resulting added
workload can be properly performed by others from the date of the issuance of the writ up to and including the date of the
election.
7.50.3 The Employer may grant such a Member leave without pay for a period from the issuance of the writ up to and
including election day. Such leave shall not be unreasonably withheld.
7.50.4 Should the Members not be elected, they shall come back to work immediately to assume their normal duties.
7.50.5 If the Members are elected and:
(a) If they are Members with tenure and return immediately upon ceasing to hold office within six (6) years of their
election, all rights, privileges and rank shall be restored to them upon return and the Members shall be entitled to a rate of
pay including all statutory
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 151

Collective Agreement 2008-11 increases which were granted to Members of the teaching staff of equal rank that the
Members occupied at the time the leave was granted. Extensions of the six (6) year time limit may be made by agreement
of the
Parties. During the term of any such leave, the Members shall be entitled to leave without remuneration. Such Members
shall not be entitled to any rights or privileges under this
Collective Agreement except in regards to benefits as governed by Article 7.40 – Leaves of Absence Without Pay.
Nothing in this Article shall be construed as preventing such Members from being employed on a part-time basis by the
University for lecturing/professional library service or for any task, in which case the
Members shall be remunerated therefore at the normal scale for part-time Members of the teaching/professional library
staff.
(b) If they are a Member without tenure, they shall be deemed to have resigned their position with the University as of the
day following their election.
7.50.6 Any Members of the Bargaining Unit who wish to run for a political office other than a full-time one are free to do so
subject to Article 5.15 – Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of Academics. Any such
Members of the Bargaining Unit shall be required to perform all normal duties as set out in this Collective
Agreement.
ARTICLE 7.55 – PHYSICAL AND MENTAL ILLNESS
7.55.1 The Members of the Bargaining Unit are eligible for sick leave up to a maximum of six (6) months at salary
otherwise receivable from the date of disability due to accident or illness, for each separate disability cause, excluding
pregnancy which shall be covered by the provisions of Article
7.60 – Pregnancy, Parental and Adoption Leaves.
Illness of a duration of more than six (6) months will be dealt with according to the provisions of the
University's Long-Term Disability Plan, and the
Employer agrees that there shall be no amendments to that plan during the life of the
Collective Agreement which shall materially affect the nature or level of the benefits to which a
Member is entitled. As soon as practicable after the start of each disability period, the Dean/University
Librarian must be informed by or on behalf of the disabled about the absence and about its expected duration.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 152

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Where the Employer makes payment to the
Member according to the above mentioned terms or assumes liability therefore, the Employer is subrogated to all rights of
recovery of the Member to the extent that the Employer has made payment to, or on behalf of, or for the benefit of the
Member.
The Employer may bring an action in the name of the Member to enforce these rights.
7.55.2 (a) A Member shall, when requested by the
Dean/University Librarian, submit the certificate of a legally qualified medical practitioner certifying that the Member is
unable to attend to the duties of her/his position;
(i) For any sick leave in excess of five
(5) consecutive working days.
(ii) In the event a Member's sick leave pattern raises substantial doubt of the claim, even if the individual's sick leave
periods are short enough not to require medical certificates otherwise.
(b) In this Article, a “legally qualified medical practitioner” shall be limited to licensed physicians, licensed midwives,
licensed dentists and registered psychologists.
Please note that being under the care and treatment of a person other than a licensed physician, a Member may
jeopardize qualifying for Long-Term Disability. A physician is a person who is duly licensed to practice medicine and is
recognized by the
College of Physicians and Surgeons.
(c) The Member shall only be required to submit one medical certificate of disability or illness per absence, unless the
expected duration of the absence is extended beyond the prognosis provided in the original certificate.
In such circumstances the Member shall submit additional certificates of disability or illness for each extension.
(d) Any certificate of disability or illness submitted, in addition to certifying that the
Member is unable to attend to the duties of her/his position, shall indicate the probable duration of the Member’s absence
but the legally qualified medical practitioner shall not disclose any information respecting the
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 153

Collective Agreement 2008-11 diagnosis of the condition giving rise to the
Member’s absence, without the Member’s written and informed consent.
(e) Where the certificate is requested under subparagraph 7.55.2 (a) (ii) above, a copy of the request for the certificate
and a copy of the certificate of disability produced shall be provided to the Union by the Dean/University
Librarian.
(f) Upon receipt of any certificate of disability, the Dean/University Librarian shall advise the Member of the Member’s right
to accommodation if such accommodation will assist the Member to return to work to full or partial duties, or will assist the
Member to return to work at an earlier date than would otherwise be the case.
(g) If the Member requires or wishes accommodation, the Member shall submit to the Dean/University Librarian the
certificate of a legally qualified medical practitioner certifying the details of the accommodation that the Member requires
and the expected duration of the accommodation.
(h) A copy of the certificate provided pursuant to paragraph 7.55.2 (g) above shall be provided to the Union by the
Dean/University
Librarian.
(i) The Employer, the Union and the Member will cooperate fully to achieve the accommodation required by the Member,
and to ensure, where possible, that any changes to the Member’s workplace required by the accommodation are in place
for the Member’s return.
(j) The reasonable costs of any certificates required under this Article shall be paid by the Member and reimbursed by the
Employer to the Member.
7.55.3 In order to have a sick leave benefits period reinstated up to the maximum, Members of the
Bargaining Unit who have been absent and in receipt of sick leave benefits must return to work for at least one (1) full
working day in the case of a completely unrelated and different disability cause, and for thirty (30) calendar days in the
case of the same disability cause.
7.55.4 Sick leave benefits for any period of absence following notice of termination of employment will
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 154

Collective Agreement 2008-11 not be payable without substantiating medical evidence.
7.55.5 Sick leave benefits are not cumulative and are not cashable upon termination of employment or at any other time.
7.55.6 Sick leave benefits will be reduced by the amount of any Worker's Compensation benefits or similar disability
income benefits which the Member of the
Bargaining Unit is eligible to receive by reason of accident or sickness, from a government plan, except Unemployment
Insurance.
(a) A Member may be required by the Vice-
President, Academic to undergo a medical examination by a legally qualified medical practitioner appointed by the
University in the following circumstances:
(i) If the Member submits a request for accommodation pursuant to paragraph 7.55.2 (g) above;
(ii) At the time the Member indicates her/his readiness to return to work, if the absence has been for a period of a month
or more;
(iii) At one other time during the sick leave; and
(b) The Employer shall pay all costs of the medical practitioner and shall pay all reasonable expenses incurred by the
Member with respect to such medical examination.
(c) Where the Employer requires the Member to undergo a medical examination pursuant to paragraph 7.55.6 (a) above it
shall notify the
Member with a copy to the Union and it shall provide the Member with the names of three
(3) duly qualified medical practitioners and the Member shall select one of those practitioners to conduct the examination.
(d) The medical practitioner who conducts the examination shall provide a report to the
Member, which report shall certify whether or not the Member is medically able to perform the duties of her/his position, or
whether the Member could perform such duties with accommodation; a prognosis for the Member’s return to work; and,
where applicable, whether or not accommodation requested by the Member is appropriate.
The report shall not contain any diagnosis of the Member’s condition, unless the Member,
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 155

Collective Agreement 2008-11 in consultation with the Union, requests that the diagnosis be included.
(e) Within five (5) working days of the receipt of the report, the Member shall provide the report to the Dean/University
Librarian who shall in turn provide a copy to the Union within five (5) working days.
7.55.7 When invalidity is due to drug addiction or alcoholism, benefits provided by this Article will be granted only for
leaves of absence necessary for proper treatment under a physician's care or that of specialized personnel.
7.55.8 When the Member’s behaviour raises reasonable and substantial doubt as to the state of her/his physical or mental
health, which affects in a material way the Member’s ability to perform her/his duties, or which raises real concern for the
safety of the Member or other members of the University community, the Vice-President, Academic may require the
Member to undergo a medical examination in accordance with clause 7.55.6 above. The Union shall be notified when
such action is taken. Where the report is requested as a result of a real concern for the safety of the Member or other
members of the University community, the report produced, in addition to the information provided pursuant to paragraph
7.55.6 (d) above, shall certify whether or not the Member’s behaviour raises any real concern for the safety of the
Member or other members of the University community.
7.55.9 Sick leave benefits defined in this Article may not be granted under the following circumstances:
(a) Intentionally self-inflicted injuries or diseases.
(b) Pregnancy (however, complications due to pregnancy are covered by sick leave provisions, upon submission of a
medical certificate).
(c) While vacation pay is also being received.
(d) Wilful participation in riots, wars or violent or uncontrolled demonstrations or protests.
(e) Injuries or diseases sustained while committing a criminal act for which the
Member has been found to be guilty by a duly constituted court or while serving a prison sentence.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 156

Collective Agreement 2008-11
ARTICLE 7.60 – PREGNANCY, PARENTAL AND ADOPTION
LEAVES
7.60.1 Pregnancy Leave
(a) A pregnant full-time Member or pregnant
Permanent Sessional Member shall be entitled to seventeen (17) weeks pregnancy leave.
(b) During the period of pregnancy leave as specified in paragraph 7.60.1 (a) above, a
Member shall receive from the Employer:
(i) For the first two (2) weeks, one- hundred percent (100%) of her nominal salary;
(ii) For up to a maximum of fifteen (15) additional weeks, an amount equal to the difference between the
Employment Insurance (EI) benefits received by the Member and one- hundred percent (100%) of the
Member's nominal salary;
(iii) Further, in the event of any reduction by the Government of Canada to the
Member's EI benefit entitlement, an amount necessary to ensure that the
Member receives the top-up described in subparagraph 7.60.2 (b)
(ii) above.
(c) If the Member is disentitled or disqualified from receiving EI benefits or should EI cease to provide coverage for
pregnancy benefits or adjust the amount of benefits that were received, then the Employer shall maintain the Member at
one-hundred percent (100%) of her nominal earnings for the period of her leave.
7.60.2 Notice Required for Pregnancy Leave
(a) The Member shall give the Employer at least two (2) weeks written notice of the date the pregnancy leave is to begin.
The notice period may be altered by mutual agreement.
(b) The notice period in paragraph 7.60.2 (a) above shall not apply if the Member stops working because of complications
caused by her pregnancy or because of a birth, still birth or miscarriage.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 157

Collective Agreement 2008-11
7.60.3 Duration of Pregnancy Leave
(a) The pregnancy leave of a Member who is entitled to take parental leave shall end seventeen (17) weeks after the
pregnancy leave began. In the case where the newborn child is hospitalized, a Member may postpone or interrupt her
pregnancy leave by the number of weeks the newborn child is hospitalized but it must be taken within the fifty-two (52)
weeks from the date of the birth of the child.
(b) The pregnancy leave of a Member who is not entitled to take parental leave shall end on the later of either the day that
is seventeen (17) weeks after the pregnancy leave began or the day that is six (6) weeks after the birth, still birth or
miscarriage.
7.60.4 Leave for Parent Not Taking Pregnancy or
Parental Leave
On the occasion of the birth of a child or the adoption of a child coming into the care or custody of a parent for the first
time, the child's parent who is not taking the pregnancy or the parental leave shall be entitled to a leave with full salary
and benefits of up to five (5) working days, to be taken at the discretion of the Member within the fifty-two
(52) weeks from the date of the birth of the child or the adoption of a child coming into the care or custody of a parent for
the first time.
7.60.5 Parental Leave on the Occasion of the Birth of a
Child
(a) On the occasion of the birth of a child, a
Member who is a parent and who has opted to take parental leave under the Employment
Insurance Act and applicable legislation shall be entitled to a parental leave of up to thirty- five (35) weeks.
(b) During the period of parental leave as specified in paragraph 7.60.5 (a) above, a
Member shall receive from the Employer:
(i) For the first two (2) weeks, one- hundred percent (100%) of her/his nominal salary;
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 158

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(ii) For up to a maximum of seven (7) additional weeks, an amount equal to the difference between the EI benefits
received by the Member and one-hundred percent (100%) of the
Member's nominal salary;
(iii) Further, in the event of any adjustment by the Government of
Canada to the Member's EI benefit entitlement, the Employer shall pay to the Member the amount necessary to ensure
that the Member receives the top-up described in subparagraph
7.60.5 (b) (ii) above.
(c) If the Member is disentitled or disqualified from receiving EI benefits or should EI cease to provide coverage for
parental benefits or adjust the amount of benefits that were received, the Employer shall maintain the
Member at one-hundred percent (100%) of her/his nominal earnings for the period of her/his leave.
7.60.6 Parental Leave on the Occasion of the Adoption of a Child
(a) On the occasion of the adoption of a child coming into the care or custody of a parent for the first time, a Member who
is a parent shall be entitled to a parental leave of up to thirty-seven (37) weeks. The parental leave must be commenced
within the fifty-two (52) weeks from the date the child comes into care or custody of the parent for the first time.
(b) During the period of parental leave as specified in paragraph 7.60.6 (a) above, a
Member shall receive from the Employer:
(i) For the first two (2) weeks, one- hundred percent (100%) of her/his nominal salary;
(ii) For up to a maximum of seven (7) additional weeks, an amount equal to the difference between the EI benefits
received by the Member and one-hundred percent (100%) of the
Member's nominal salary.
(iii) Further, in the event of any adjustment by the Government of
Canada to the Member's EI benefit entitlement, the Employer shall pay to the Member the amount necessary to
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 159

Collective Agreement 2008-11 ensure that the Member receives the top-up described in subparagraph
7.60.6 (b) (ii) above.
(c) If the Member is disentitled or disqualified from receiving EI benefits or should EI cease to provide coverage for
parental benefits or adjust the amount of benefits that were received, the Employer shall maintain the
Member at one-hundred percent (100%) of her/his nominal earnings for the period of her leave.
7.60.7 Notice Required for Parental Leave
(a) A Member shall give written notice to the
Employer of her/his intention to take a parental leave at least two (2) weeks prior to the commencement of such leave.
The notice period may be altered by mutual agreement.
(b) The notice period in paragraph 7.60.7 (a) above shall not apply if the Member stops working because the child comes
into the custody, care and control of the parent sooner than expected.
7.60.8 Extended Parental Leave
An extended parental leave without pay, up to a maximum of one (1) year, shall be given to
Members who request it.
7.60.9 General Considerations
(a) During leaves under this Article, the Member shall continue to participate in the pension plan and the other benefit
plans set out in this Collective Agreement. The Member and the Employer shall each continue to pay their applicable
share of contributions and/or premiums, unless the Member elects not to do so in writing.
(b) Nothing in this Article shall prevent a
Member from claiming sick leave for absences from work due to illnesses.
(c) Upon return to work, a Member who has taken leaves under this Article shall resume her/his former position with
her/his full nominal salary and benefits as provided for under this Collective Agreement.
(d) The period of a Member's leave shall be included in the calculation of her/his length of service for seniority purposes.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 160

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(e) A Member on pregnancy, parental or adoption leave may elect to defer contractual decisions on reappointment or
tenure/permanence by an equivalent period of time. When a Member elects to defer such decisions, she/he shall provide
the
Dean/University Librarian, or equivalent, with written notice of her/his intention to do so.
(f) The Parties agree that the provisions of this
Article shall be no less than those in the
Employment Standards Act, 2000 and
Employment Insurance Act as may be further amended. Differences in the interpretation of this Article shall be resolved
based on consistency with the Acts.
(g) Nothing in this Article shall prevent a
Member claiming pregnancy, parental or adoption leave during a sabbatical leave.
Any unused portion of a sabbatical leave shall be taken at a time mutually acceptable to the Member and Dean/University
Librarian.
(h) If both parents are Members, they may share their paid periods of leave between them.
ARTICLE 7.65 – SPECIAL LEAVES
7.65.1 A full-time Member, who holds a tenured or probationary appointment within the University, shall be eligible for a
paid leave of absence for a period of up to two (2) weeks to fulfill responsibilities relating to the special needs of a member
of the
Employee's family. Special needs may include, but are not restricted to, resettlement of aged or disabled parents, serious
illness of parents, partner, or child, medical treatment of partner or child that cannot be provided in the Sudbury Region.
The teaching/professional and service responsibilities of
Members on this leave shall normally be assumed by their colleagues without additional expense to the University.
ARTICLE 7.70 – COMPASSIONATE LEAVE
7.70.1 In the event of death of a partner, son or daughter
(including step-son, step-daughter and child of partner), the Employee shall be granted a leave of absence of up to ten
(10) working days with pay.
7.70.2 In the event of the death of another member of an
Employee's family, the Employee shall be granted a leave of absence of up to five (5) working days with
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 161

Collective Agreement 2008-11 pay.
The term “another member of an Employee’s family” means brother and sister, step-brother and step-sister, mother and
father, mother-in-law and father-in-law, sister-in-law and brother-in-law, grandparent, guardian, grandchildren,
daughter-in- law and son-in-law.
7.70.3 For a longer period of absence, a Member may apply for leave without pay according to Article 7.40 –
Leave of Absence Without Pay.
7.70.4 In the event of the death of an Employee’s nephew, niece, grandparent-in-law, aunt or uncle, the
Member shall be granted a leave of absence of one
(1) working day without loss in pay.
7.70.5 If, during her/his vacation period, a Member is bereaved in circumstances under which she/he would have been
eligible for leave under this
Article, she/he shall be granted leave and her/his vacation pay credits shall be restored to the extent of any concurrent
leave granted.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 162

Collective Agreement 2008-11
SALARY AND BENEFITS
ARTICLE 8.10 – SALARY STRUCTURE
The Salary Structure for the Academic Year 2008-09
8.10.1 The salary of each Member shall be composed of the base salary of each Member as of June 30, 2008 as modified
by the following items:
(a) A scale increase of three and one quarter percent (3.25%) of the Member's regular salary.
(b) A Progress-Through-The-Ranks increment for the evaluation carried out for the year 2007-
08 as described in Article 8.20 – Procedures for the Award/Denial of a Progress-Through-
The-Ranks Increment. The Progress-
Through-The-Ranks increments shall have a value of two thousand six hundred dollars
($2,600).
For all ranks other than Full
Professor/Librarian, where a Member’s salary exceeds $126,584 per annum, the
PTR will be at fifty percent (50%) value. For all ranks, where a Member’s salary exceeds
$140,110 per annum, the PTR will be nil.
(c) Additional qualification increments shall be awarded pursuant to Article 8.30 – Additional
Qualifications Increments.
(d) Merit increments shall be awarded according to Article 8.25 – Merit Increments, regardless of breakpoints.
(e) On January 1, 2009, a progressive catch-up based on the following formula: ($100,000 /
Member’s salary) X five hundred and fifty dollars ($550)
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 163

Collective Agreement 2008-11
8.10.2 The salary floors for 2008-09 shall be as follows:
Rank Floor
Lecturer / General Librarian $52,277
Assistant Professor / $63,317
Librarian
Associate Professor / $76,268
Librarian
Full Professor / Librarian $93,966
The Salary Structure for the Academic Year 2009-10
8.10.3 The salary of each Member shall be composed of the base salary of each Member as of June 30, 2009 as modified
by the following items:
(a) A scale increase of three and one quarter percent (3.25%) of the Member's regular salary.
(b) A Progress-Through-The-Ranks increment for the evaluation carried out for the year 2008-
09 as described in Article 8.20 – Procedures for the Award/Denial of a Progress-Through-
The-Ranks Increment. The Progress-
Through-The-Ranks increments shall have a value of two thousand seven hundred dollars
($2,700).
For all ranks other than Full
Professor/Librarian, where a Member’s salary exceeds $130,698 per annum, the
PTR will be at fifty percent (50%) value. For all ranks, where a Member’s salary exceeds
$144,664 per annum, the PTR will be nil.
(c) Additional qualification increments shall be awarded pursuant to Article 8.30 – Additional
Qualifications Increments.
(d) Promotion or Merit increments shall be awarded according to Article 8.15 – Progress-
Through-The-Ranks Increments and Article
8.25 – Merit Increments, regardless of breakpoints.
(e) On January 1, 2010, a progressive catch-up based on the following formula: ($100,000 /
Member’s salary) X nine hundred and twenty-five dollars ($925)
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 164

Collective Agreement 2008-11
8.10.4 The salary floors for 2009-10 shall be as follows:
Rank Floor
Lecturer / General Librarian $54,526
Assistant Professor / $65,930
Librarian
Associate Professor / $79,252
Librarian
Full Professor / Librarian $97,527
The Salary Structure for the Academic Year 2010-11
8.10.5 The salary of each Member shall be composed of the base salary of each Member as of June 30, 2010 as modified
by the following items:
(a) A scale increase of three and one quarter percent (3.25%) of the Member's regular salary.
(b) A Progress-Through-The-Ranks increment for the evaluation carried out for the year
2009-10 as described in Article 8.20 –
Procedures for the Award/Denial of a
Progress-Through-The-Ranks Increment. The
Progress-Through-The-Ranks increments shall have a value of two thousand eight hundred dollars ($2,800).
For all ranks other than Full
Professor/Librarian, where a Member’s salary exceeds $134,946 per annum, the
PTR will be at fifty percent (50%) value. For all ranks, where a Member’s salary exceeds
$149,365 per annum, the PTR will be nil.
(c) Additional qualification increments shall be awarded pursuant to Article 8.30 – Additional
Qualifications Increments.
(d) Promotion or Merit increments shall be awarded according to Articles 8.15 –
Progress-Through-The-Ranks Increments and Article 8.25 – Merit Increments, regardless of breakpoints.
(e) On January 1, 2011, a progressive catch-up based on the following formula: ($100,000 /
Member’s salary) X one thousand dollars
($1000)
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 165

Collective Agreement 2008-11
8.10.6 The salary floors for 2010-11 shall be as follows:
Rank Floor
Lecturer / General Librarian $57,298
Assistant Professor / $69,073
Librarian
Associate Professor / $82,827
Librarian
Full Professor / Librarian $101,697
ARTICLE 8.15 – PROGRESS-THROUGH-THE-RANKS
INCREMENTS
8.15.1 The purpose of these increments is to provide, through a series of salary increases, orderly promotion within rank.
8.15.2 These increments shall be awarded annually for satisfactory performance of duties per Article 8.20 –
Procedures for the Award/Denial of a Progress-
Through-The-Ranks Increment.
8.15.3 Increments may be withheld if performance is deficient, as outlined in Article 8.20 – Procedures for the
Award/Denial of a Progress-Through-The-Ranks
Increment.
8.15.4 Any Members who are promoted to a higher rank shall not be required to take a loss in salary. If such
Members' salaries are below the floor salary of the higher rank, they shall receive the floor salary upon promotion.
8.15.5 Promotion Increment: Effective July 1, 2009, there shall be an award equal to one (1) PTR increment added to the
Member’s base salary upon promotion from either Lecturer/General Librarian to Assistant
Professor/Librarian, from Assistant
Professor/Librarian to Associate
Professor/Librarian, from Associate
Professor/Librarian to Full Professor/Librarian. In no circumstances will a Member be awarded more than two (2) PTRs in
any given year, excepting the case of a reinstatement of the PTR increment as per Article 8.20 – Procedures for the
Award/Denial of a Progress-Through-The-Ranks Increment.
ARTICLE 8.20 – PROCEDURES FOR THE AWARD/DENIAL
OF A PROGRESS-THROUGH-THE-RANKS INCREMENT
8.20.1 When a Member's performance is judged to be satisfactory by the Dean/University Librarian, the annual increment
shall be awarded.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 166

Collective Agreement 2008-11
8.20.2 Decisions to award the annual increment or notification of a review as per clause 8.20.4 below shall be
communicated to the Members by June 30, provided that the Member submitted her/his annual report by May 15. If the
annual report is submitted after May 15, the decision of the Dean/University
Librarian shall be communicated to the Member within six (6) weeks after the Member’s annual report has been
submitted.
8.20.3 For those Members on sabbatical or study leave, the decision whether to award the annual increment may be
delayed until submission of their final report as specified in Article 5.45 – Annual Report for
Members.
8.20.4 The Dean/University Librarian shall examine the annual reports as per Article 5.45 – Annual Report for
Members, and make such other inquiries, as she/he deems appropriate. Where the Dean/University
Librarian has concerns about the Member’s performance with respect to the awarding of the PTR increment, the
Dean/University Librarian shall first issue a written warning, stating the basis of the concerns, and what needs to be done
to remedy them. The Member shall be awarded the PTR increment for that year and shall indicate in the following year’s
annual report what measures the
Member has taken to address those concerns. If in the following year, the Dean/University Librarian is not satisfied that
the concerns have been addressed by the Member and that the Member does not show active participation and/or
satisfactory performance in all three (3) areas, A), B), and C) (within the provisions of Article 5.15 – Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of Academics) or in the subset of those areas for which the Member’s terms of employment
are relevant, the Dean/University Librarian shall communicate to the Member the possibility that the
PTR will be denied. The Dean/University Librarian shall specify the reasons and provide the evidence giving rise to this
possibility. The Dean/University
Librarian shall invite the Member to a meeting in order to address the concerns. The Dean/University
Librarian shall inform the Union of the upcoming meeting and shall inform the Member of her/his right to be accompanied
by a Union representative. The review shall include a consideration of at least the three (3) previous annual reports, if
available, and a meeting with the Member. The Dean/University
Librarian shall invite the Member to submit relevant materials.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 167

Collective Agreement 2008-11
8.20.5 When a review is undertaken under the terms of clause 8.20.4 above, the deadline for communicating the decision
to the Member is delayed by one (1) month from those stated in clause 8.20.2 above.
8.20.6 After making her/his evaluation, the Dean/University
Librarian shall inform the Member in writing whether the increment is awarded and shall provide a justification for the
decision.
8.20.7 A Member whose annual increment is denied shall have the right of appeal to the Vice-President,
Academic. In making her/his decision, the Vice-
President, Academic shall at a minimum consult the annual report, the investigation made by the
Dean/University Librarian, and the appeal presented by the Member, and may consult more broadly. In cases where a
Member elects to appeal, the decision of the Vice-President,
Academic shall be communicated to the Member within six (6) weeks of the Member’s appeal.
8.20.8 If the Vice-President, Academic reverses the decision of the Dean/University Librarian and awards the annual
increment, a retroactive payment shall be made to the Member as appropriate.
8.20.9 There shall be no denial of a PTR increment to a full-time Member with a probationary appointment prior to the
Member's tenure decision as per Article
5.60 – Tenure Evaluation Procedures.
8.20.10 A Member shall have the opportunity for reinstatement of the increment, as follows: A reinstatement of the
increment shall occur July 1 for the academic year after the Member receives two
(2) consecutive satisfactory annual assessments from the Dean/University Librarian, or after the
Member receives a promotion in rank as per Article
5.65 – Promotion Procedures, or after the Member receives a merit award as per Article 8.25 – Merit
Increments. The reinstated amount shall be equal to the amount of the PTR denied.
8.20.11 If, within three (3) years of the first denial of a PTR, the Member’s performance is not satisfactory the
Dean/University Librarian may deny the PTR, as per clause 8.20.4 above without a preliminary year of warning.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 168

Collective Agreement 2008-11
ARTICLE 8.25 – MERIT INCREMENTS
8.25.1 Merit increments are awarded by the Vice-President,
Academic and shall become a permanent part of the
Member's salary structure. Only Full
Professors/Librarians and Permanent Sessional
Lecturers are eligible for merit increments.
8.25.2 It shall be the goal of the Vice-President, Academic to award merit increments to at least five percent (5%) of the
Full Professors/Librarians and Permanent
Sessional Lecturers at Laurentian University.
Notwithstanding this goal, the criteria specified in clause 8.25.5 below shall not be violated.
8.25.3 All merit increments have the value of one Progress-
Through-The-Ranks increment.
8.25.4 Merit increments are awarded according to the procedures of Article 5.50 – Assessment of a
Member’s Performance. Only tenured members are eligible to vote.
8.25.5 For Full Professors/Librarians, the FPC/FFPC/LPC shall consider the award of merit increments in relation to
criteria for promotion to the rank for Full
Professor/Librarian. The Member’s performance at
Laurentian University over a three (3) year time period or since the award of the last merit increment, whichever is shorter,
must be judged clearly above the level for promotion to Full Professor/Librarian, as stated in Article 5.10 – Academic
Qualifications
Guidelines.
For Permanent Sessional Lecturers, the judging of the applicant’s performance over the past three (3) years, or since the
award of the last merit increase, shall be based on consistently good teaching.
8.25.6 In making recommendations in merit increment cases, the procedure in Article 5.50 – Assessment of a Member’s
Performance shall be followed.
8.25.7 All merit increments received previously or awarded during the academic year 2007-08 under the terms of prior
Collective Agreements remain in force.
8.25.8 The determination of individuals to receive merit increments pursuant to clause 8.25.5 above shall not be subject to
grievance.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 169

Collective Agreement 2008-11
8.25.9 Although Lecturer, Assistant and Associate
Professors are not eligible for merit increments, as per clause 8.15.5 of Article 8.15 – Progress-Through-
The-Ranks Increments, Members in these ranks shall receive an additional PTR when promoted to the next rank.
ARTICLE 8.30 – ADDITIONAL QUALIFICATIONS
INCREMENTS
8.30.1 An additional increment, equal to the value of a
Progress-Through-The-Ranks increment, shall be awarded to individuals obtaining a first Doctorate provided that such a
degree was not a condition of nomination to a specific rank and salary as indicated in the letter of appointment. Such an
award will be retroactive to the first (1st) day of July immediately preceding the receipt of the Doctorate. The Doctorate will
be deemed to have been received when the individual can provide a diploma or a letter from the university where the
Doctorate is being obtained indicating that all the conditions for the Doctorate, including the thesis defence and the
corrections to the thesis, have been met. The Member shall apply for an additional increment through the
Dean/University Librarian and must furnish a copy of the appropriate document.
ARTICLE 8.35 – OVERLOADS
8.35.1 All ranks of full-time Members who are teaching a course on a paid overload basis will receive a stipend as shown
below for courses beginning after these dates:
Full course Half course
(6 credits) (3 credits)
July 1, 2008 $8,596 $4,298
July 1, 2009 $8,811 $4,406
July 1, 2010 $9,028 $4,514
8.35.2 Where scheduled Continuing Education courses may otherwise have to be cancelled, Members may, if they
choose, agree to teach a course for an amount less than the overload stipend. The Union shall be informed of any such
agreement prior to its settlement.
8.35.3 In recognition of agreement by the Parties, that excessive overload teaching/professional Library service is
undesirable (specified in paragraph
5.40.6 (b) of Article 5.40 – Academic Workload), the
Dean/University Librarian has the authority to limit the number of overload courses a Member may teach in any given
academic year, or its equivalent in the Library. In order to fulfil this function, the
Dean/University Librarian must approve all paid
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 170

Collective Agreement 2008-11 overloads including distance education courses and on-campus courses administered by
the Centre for
Continuing Education. In decisions to limit the number of paid overloads, the Dean/University
Librarian shall be guided by her/his assessment of the total workload of the Member, the impact of overload
teaching/professional library work on the likely career progress of the Member, including the capacity of the Member to
undertake scholarly activity and administrative duties expected of all
Members. A decision by the Dean/University
Librarian to limit paid overloads in any academic year shall not be grievable.
8.35.4 Librarians may be paid full or half overloads according to the schedule outlined in this Article.
8.35.5 All Members who believe they are entitled to an overload stipend shall apply per Article 5.40 –
Academic Workload.
8.35.6 Full-time Members in the Department of Music teaching Applied Music courses on overload shall be paid the base
rate of $55.00 per hour, plus an increase by two and a half percent (2.5%) in 2008-
09, two and a half percent (2.5%) in 2009-10 and two and a half percent (2.5%) in 2010-11.
Total hourly rate of pay
July 1, 2008 $56.38
July 1, 2009 $57.78
July 1, 2010 $59.23
ARTICLE 8.40 – DISTANCE EDUCATION COURSES
8.40.1 Normal function
The development and/or supervision of distance or on-line education courses are an integral part of
University functions. Therefore, the development and/or supervision of a distance or on-line education course may be part
of a Member's normal workload as per Article 5.40 – Academic Workload and according to Senate regulations or may be
carried out on an overload basis. Prior to assigning the supervision of a distance or on-line course to a
Member as part of her/his normal workload, the
Dean shall seek volunteers willing to teach such a course. The Dean shall not assign the development of a distance or
on-line education course to a
Member as part of her/his normal workload without her/his prior consent in writing. The development
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 171

Collective Agreement 2008-11 and/or supervision of a distance or on-line education course are governed by the terms
and conditions of a contract issued by the Centre for Continuing
Education on behalf of the University.
8.40.2 Equivalents
The development of a distance education course shall normally be equivalent to twice the credit value of the course but
may be equivalent to a lesser amount or up to a maximum of a full workload.
In all instances, a written statement of the equivalency will be provided in advance by the Dean when the work is part of
assigned workload and by the Director of Continuing Education otherwise.
8.40.3 Copyright
Copyright for distance education courses shall be governed by Article 6.35 – Copyright.
8.40.4 Compensation
Where the development of a distance education course is not included as a part of a Member's normal workload the
payment shall be an overload payment based on the equivalence outlined in clause
8.40.2 above. A Member may also agree to some combination of normal workload assignment plus paid overload as
appropriate.
8.40.5 Supervision
Where the supervision of a distance education course is not included as part of a normal workload, a six (6) credit course
shall be paid for on the basis of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500) for one (1) to five (5) students. For each
additional student more than five (5) students, the additional pay per student shall be two hundred and fifteen dollars
($215) for the year 2008-09, two hundred and twenty dollars ($220) for the year 2009-10, and two hundred and thirty
dollars ($230) for the year
2010-11. The maximum pay for a six (6) credit course shall be the rate of pay of a Sessional
Member without establishment for a six (6) credit course as per Article 4.55 – Rates of Pay for
Sessional Members with restrictions as per clause
5.40.6 of Article 5.40 – Academic Workload. Three
(3) credit courses shall be pro-rated
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 172

Collective Agreement 2008-11
ARTICLE 8.45 – BENEFITS
8.45.1 The following benefits are available to full-time
Members and Permanent Sessional Members:
(a) Retirement Plan of Laurentian University of
Sudbury and its Federated and Affiliated
Colleges
(b) Group Life Insurance
(c) Accidental Death and Dismemberment
(d) Dependent Group Life
(e) Extended Health Care (including semi-private hospital coverage)
(f) Long-Term Disability
(g) Dental Care
8.45.2 Participation in the Retirement Plan of Laurentian
University of Sudbury and Its Federated and
Affiliated Colleges shall be mandatory for all new full-time faculty Members effective the date of their appointment.
8.45.3 The cost of premiums shall be shared by the
Employer and the Member on the following basis:
Employer Member
Life Insurance 50% 50%
Coverage up to maximum of
$400,000
Accidental 50% 50%
Death & Coverage up to
Dismember- maximum of ment $400,000
Dependent 50% 50%
Group Life
Extended 100%
Health Care
Dental Care 100%
Long Term 100%
Disability Coverage amount up to maximum of
$5,300 per month
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 173

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Retirement (a) 7% of the part (a) 5% of the part
Plan of the of the
Member’s Member’s
Pensionable Pensionable
Earnings that Earnings that is below the is below the year’s basic year’s basic exemption as exemption as prescribed by
defined by the the Canada Canada
Pension Plan; Pension Plan;
(b) 5.2% of the (b) 3.2% of the part of the part of the
Member’s Member’s
Pensionable Pensionable
Earnings that Earnings that is between the is between year’s basic the year’s exemption and basic the year’s exemption
maximum and the year’s pensionable maximum earnings; pensionable earnings;
(c) 7% of the part (c) 5% of the part of the of the
Member’s Member’s
Pensionable Pensionable
Earnings that Earnings that is in excess of is in excess of the year’s the year’s maximum maximum pensionable
pensionable earnings. earnings.
(d) 1.5% of the part of the
Member’s
Pensionable
Earnings to the Minimum
Guarantee
Fund in accordance with the
Retirement
Plan of
Laurentian
University of
Sudbury and its Federated and Affiliated
Colleges.
8.45.4 Extended Health Care
Effective November 1, 2008, extended health care will be enhanced by providing full payment to paramedical practitioners
(audiologist, chiropractor, kinesiologist, massage therapist, naturopath, osteopath, podiatrist, and speech therapist) up to
an annual limit of two thousand two hundred dollars
($2,200) per benefit year per covered individual.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 174

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Effective November 1, 2008, the professional services for a certified psychologists only will increase up to four thousand
dollars ($4,000) per covered individual per benefit year.
Extended health care will continue to provide payment, according to the Extended Health Care
Plan, to physiotherapists and athletic therapists without an annual limit.
8.45.5 Vision Care
Effective November 1, 2008, purchase and fitting of prescription glasses or elective contact lenses, as well as repairs or
elective laser vision correction procedures, up to an overall maximum of three hundred and fifty dollars ($350) per covered
individual in any twenty-four (24) consecutive months.
8.45.6 Hearing Aids
Effective November 1, 2008, up to five hundred dollars ($500) per covered individual in any two (2) consecutive benefit
years.
8.45.7 Dental
The Employer shall pay one hundred percent
(100%) of the cost of the premiums of the dental plan in accordance with the current rate schedule as established by the
Ontario Dental Association and including six (6) month recall, effective
November 1, 2008.
Annual Reimbursement
Maximum
Basic coverage, $3,000 including major services, per person per benefit year:
Basic coverage 100%
Reimbursement by plan
Major services 80%
Reimbursement by plan
Orthodontics Lifetime 50% coverage per Maximum Reimbursement person $3,000 by plan
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 175

Collective Agreement 2008-11
8.45.8 Any Member on an unpaid leave of absence shall make special arrangements for benefit coverage as outlined in
Article 7.40 – Leaves of Absence Without
Pay.
8.45.9 Benefits for the spouse and dependants of a
Member, enrolled in the various benefits plans at the time of death, shall continue for a period of two
(2) years from the date of death and shall terminate at the end of the month in which the death occurred, two (2) years
after the date of death.
8.45.10 Retirees Health Benefits Plan (RHBP) (effective
July 1, 2008)
(a) Member contribution increased to fifteen dollars and sixty four cents ($15.64) per month.
(b) Maximum benefit for single retirees increased to eight hundred dollars ($800) per year.
(c) Maximum benefit for family of retirees increased to one thousand three hundred dollars ($1,300) per year.
ARTICLE 8.50 – TUITION FEE EXEMPTION AND SPOUSAL
LIBRARY CARD
Tuition Fee Exemption
8.50.1 The following shall be eligible for Tuition Fee
Exemption.
(a) All full-time Members as of the effective date of appointment and all retired full-time
Members.
(b) Spouses and dependants of all full-time
Members, of retired full-time Members, of deceased retired Members and of Members who died while in the full-time
employ of the
University. Dependants include wife and husband (including common-law relationships), children up to the age of
twenty-six (26) years (including natural, step, and adopted children, wards and other children for whom the Member is the
primary caregiver).
8.50.2 Exemption from tuition fees is subject to the following conditions:
(a) A student must remain in good standing as defined by the Registrar's Office in order to qualify for tuition exemption. In
the event of loss of good standing, the same course(s) or
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 176

Collective Agreement 2008-11 an equivalent one(s) may be taken at the student's expense in order to reinstate good
standing and eligibility.
(b) Students who are eligible for an exemption from tuition fees are not exempted from the payment of incidental fees.
(c) To the extent that a grant is specifically given to defray tuition a student who receives a grant is not eligible for
exemption from tuition fees.
(d) To the extent that tuition is reduced by a
Laurentian University tuition scholarship, the student is not eligible for exemption from tuition fees. Where the funds are
from an outside source this condition does not apply.
8.50.3 Eligibility ceases with the term immediately following the date of termination of employment of a Member, unless
otherwise specified in this Collective
Agreement.
8.50.4 The Employer reserves the right to modify or rescind this policy depending on the development of future
government policy that has a bearing on this matter.
Spousal Photo ID Library Card
8.50.5 On an annual basis, spouses of all Members, including retired Members, deceased retired
Members and Members who died while in the employ of the University, upon request, will be supplied with a photo
identification library card at no cost to them except if they require a replacement for a lost card. The charge for
replacement will be fifteen dollars ($15) per card.
ARTICLE 8.55 – MOVING EXPENSES
8.55.1 On initial appointment to the University each regular full-time Member shall be entitled to reimbursement for moving
expenses subject to the following conditions:
(a) All claims must be substantiated by official receipts or reasonable facsimiles.
(b) The University shall reimburse claims at the rate of one hundred percent (100%) to a maximum of five thousand
dollars ($5,000).
In exceptional circumstances, the University
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 177

Collective Agreement 2008-11 may exceed this amount. Such conditions will be specified in the initial letter of
appointment.
8.55.2 Moving expenses include:
(a) Moving, packing, crating and unpacking of household goods and personal effects.
(b) Transfer of family by the most economical means of transportation.
(c) Reasonable living expenses for the duration of the trip to the new location.
(d) One (1) advance visit for the purpose of securing suitable housing. The newly appointed Members may be
accompanied by their spouse in this instance.
8.55.3 Employees appointed on a contract of twelve (12) month’s duration or less shall not normally be eligible to claim
moving expenses. The Vice-President,
Academic may under special circumstances allow some amount of moving expenses to be reimbursed for such
employees.
8.55.4 Moving expenses paid to a new Member will constitute a loan made by the University. This loan will be retired
when the Member has completed three
(3) years of continuous service to the University, each year being equivalent to one third (1/3) of the reimbursement of the
loan.
8.55.5 Should the beneficiary of such a loan leave the
University before completing three (3) years of continuous service, for personal or disciplinary reasons, she/he must
reimburse the University for the remaining unretired portion of the loan.
ARTICLE 8.60 – PHYSICAL EDUCATION FACILITIES
8.60.1 As of the effective date of appointment, all full-time
Members, their spouses and dependants as defined in Article 8.50 – Tuition Fee Exemption and Spousal
Library Card shall be eligible for free Physical
Education Centre membership subject to the payment of an annual service fee and lockerette rental fee as established by
the Division of Physical
Education.
ARTICLE 8.65 – PUBLIC LIABILITY INSURANCE
8.65.1 Subject to the express provisions of the current policy (ies) of insurance providing such coverage, the University
shall continue to maintain the present public liability insurance insuring, among others,
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 178

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Members who are acting within the scope of their employment against liability claims (including negligence, property
damage, personal injury, libel and slander), up to a limit of four million dollars
($4,000,000). Any legal representation to which
Members are entitled under this policy shall be provided in a fair and equitable manner. The Union is entitled to receive a
copy of the insurance policy upon request. Any changes in this current policy shall be made with the agreement of the
Parties.
ARTICLE 8.70 – PARKING
8.70.1 The Parties agree that Members wishing to reserve a parking space in any parking area on campus shall pay the
fee established by the University. The parking fees shall be determined following consultation with the Advisory
Committee on Security
Services on which the Union shall maintain its current representation of one (1) Member.
8.70.2 Members with a temporary or Long-Term Disability or pregnant Members shall be entitled upon request to their
Dean/University Librarian to a reserved parking space close to their office.
ARTICLE 8.75 – REIMBURSEMENT OF EXPENSES
8.75.1 All Members will be reimbursed within the normal amounts payable following approval of the
Miscellaneous Expense Claim Form for reasonable out-of-pocket expenses incurred while on authorized business for the
University, such as parking fees, transportation costs, meal allowances, equipment for field trips, accommodation costs,
and incidental expenses. Receipts for such expenses will be provided where required. The claim for reimbursement
including receipts where required shall be submitted to the Member’s Chair/Director.
In the event that the Chair/Director is unwilling or unable to reimburse such expenses, the receipts for such expenses
shall be submitted to the appropriate Dean/University Librarian. Amounts reimbursed will be according to the schedule of
amounts in the Employer’s ‘Policies and Procedures
Concerning Travel and Related Expenses’ as updated annually and amended to include incidental expenses.
ARTICLE 8.80 – POLICY AND PROCEDURES IN THE
EVENT OF DEATH
NOTE: The following procedures and practices are currently in place and are largely determined by external agencies. It
may from time to time be
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 179

Collective Agreement 2008-11 necessary to make adjustments to these procedures based on requirements of these
external agencies.
The Parties agree that such changes required by external agencies do not require prior approval.
8.80.1 The beneficiary is to contact the Pension and
Benefits Officer in the Personnel Office. If within seven (7) days the University has not been contacted by the beneficiary,
the University shall make every reasonable effort to contact the beneficiary.
8.80.2 Life Insurance
(a) The Employee is insured for three (3) times salary to a maximum of four-hundred thousand dollars ($400,000).
(b) The following documents will be required to request payment of the insurance carrier:
(i) The beneficiary must complete a
Statement required by the insurance carrier as well as provide her/his
Social Insurance Number;
(ii) The notice of the Employee's death that appeared in the Obituary
Notices;
(iii) A Death Certificate;
(iv) The last insurance certificate that was issued to the faculty Member.
(c) The Life Insurance proceeds are usually paid within one (1) month.
8.80.3 Pension Plan
If the Member dies prior to receiving a pension, the following will be required to process the benefits:
(a) The University shall contact the Beneficiary and outline the procedures to be followed.
(b) The Beneficiary must complete an
"Application for Death Benefit".
(c) Provide a Death Certificate.
(d) Provide a "notarial copy" of the Employee's
"Last Will and Testament".
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 180

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(e) All Members should have a current "Last Will and Testament".
(f) Beneficiaries of Members without a "Last
Will and Testament" will have to settle any disputes between potential Beneficiaries
(children vs spouse) in the courts, prior to receiving any funds from the Pension Plan.
The file will be forwarded to the Actuary for the calculation of the death benefit. Once that calculation is received, the
Beneficiary will be contacted. The Beneficiary can request a lump sum refund or a transfer to a R.R.S.P. that is not
subject to locked-in provisions.
The death benefit from the Pension Plan is usually paid within two (2) to three (3) months.
If the Member dies after commencing to receive her/his pension, the form of pension that was selected by the Member will
determine if further benefits are payable to the Beneficiary.
8.80.4 Benefits to Spouse and Dependants shall continue as per clause 8.45.9 of Article 8.45 – Benefits.
8.80.5 Every Member while employed by Laurentian
University will be expected to complete by January 1,
2009 or within six (6) months of hire a statement to be retained in their Personnel File indicating who shall have access to
the Member’s computer files and office contents in the event of the Member’s death or incapacitation. In the event of the
death or incapacitation of the Member, the Employer shall review the Member’s files and office contents to retrieve the
documents and files belonging to the
Employer. This review shall be consistent with Article
6.30 – Patents and Article 6.35 – Copyright. After this review, only the person or persons named shall have access to the
Member’s computer files and office contents. If there is no signed access statement, the right of access shall go to the
executor in the event of death, and to the next of kin in the event of incapacitation. The executor or next of kin shall have
access to the deceased member’s files for a period of at least one (1) year. The ownership of the computer files and office
contents belonging to the Member shall be transferred according to the
Member’s will.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 181

Collective Agreement 2008-11
ARTICLE 8.85 – SALARY TO BENEFICIARY IN THE EVENT
OF DEATH OF FACULTY MEMBER
8.85.1 Salary Rate: shall be the rate of gross pay for the contract period, including any proportionate reduction in stipend
consequent on approved
University policies.
8.85.2 Termination Date: shall be the end of the month in which the death occurs.
8.85.3 Period of Negotiations: where it would unduly retard settlement to postpone closure until the completion of a
Collective Agreement, an arbitrary figure in excess of any anticipated agreement may be used as the basis for settlement
by mutual agreement of the Parties.
8.85.4 Vacation Pay: the lesser of two percent (2%) per week or eight percent (8%) per month of entitlement shall be
calculated on gross earnings paid during the period of the year to termination.
8.85.5 Sabbatical Leave: is an investment by the University in an approved plan of professional development with a view
to enhance future contributions to the work of the University and the broader scholarly community.
Sabbatical leave entitlement is not a benefit, which the Employee or her/his assigns can claim as of right in the event of
either termination (for any cause), retirement, or death. For purposes of death benefits
(Hospital care, Extended Medical and Dental
Insurance), any sabbatical stipend is to be regarded as the equivalent of salary.
8.85.6 Contractual Travel Allowance: may be claimed by the
Beneficiary for vouchered expenses incurred prior to termination.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 182

Collective Agreement 2008-11
CHAIRS AND DIRECTORS
ARTICLE 9.10 – DUTIES OF CHAIRS/DIRECTORS
9.10.1 The Chairs/Directors are responsible for providing academic leadership to their Departments/Schools.
They serve as the representatives of their
Departments/Schools in administrative matters, as well as the official spokesperson of their
Departments/Schools and they report to the
Dean/University Librarian.
9.10.2 Their duties are the following and shall be carried out in accordance with good administrative practices:
(a) To ensure, to the degree possible, that the
Members of the Department/School are informed of their duties and responsibilities in accordance with Senate
regulations, the regulations of the University and this
Collective Agreement.
(b) To convene and preside over meetings of the Department/School at regular intervals during the academic year and to
be an ex officio and voting Member of its standing committees.
(c) To ensure as far as reasonably possible that the Members of the Department/School have an opportunity to share in
the decision- making process, in the formulation of policies, and in the administrative tasks of the Department/School.
(d) To review and act on all matters involving staff, both faculty and other, with the appropriate internal body and in
accordance with Article 5.45 – Annual Report for
Members and in accordance with the terms of Collective Agreements applying to other
University bargaining units.
(e) To be responsible for presenting the academic programs of the
Department/School for accreditation or approval of external bodies, as needed.
(f) To prepare budgetary recommendations and administer the annual budget for the
Department/School in conjunction with the
Dean/University Librarian and the appropriate internal body.
(g) To advise the Dean/University Librarian on the teaching roster and time-table/desk time
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 183

Collective Agreement 2008-11 for the Department/School following consultation with Members of the
Department/School and other appropriate
University bodies and officers including the
Office of the Registrar and the Centre for
Continuing Education and to supervise the implementation of the timetable and roster/desk time.
(h) To supervise student counselling on academic matters and the assignment of programs of study within the
Department/School.
(i) To prepare a succinct annual report, for submission to the Dean/University Librarian due by June 30, on the enrolment,
curriculum and other programmatic issues facing the Department/School. The annual report shall also include a list of
Sessional
Lecturers with establishment in specific courses. In preparing the annual report, the
Chair/Director shall use a standardized form developed by the Dean/University Librarian for each Faculty and the Library
and approved by the Faculty Council. The
Department/School reports shall be submitted to the Dean/University Librarian after they have been distributed to
Members of the Department/School.
(j) To supervise the use and proper maintenance of space and equipment allocated to the Department/School.
(k) To maintain relations between the
Department/School and external professional constituencies and agencies and the wider community, as relevant and
appropriate: and to arrange representation as necessary.
(l) To ensure, to the degree possible, that the
Members of the Department/School receive a copy of the summary workload recommendations and the Dean’s/University
Librarian’s workload decision according to clause 5.40.1 of Article 5.40 – Academic
Workload, and that each Member also receive a copy of the sabbatical plans according to clause 7.25.3 of Article 7.25 –
Sabbatical Leaves.
(m) To perform such other duties in connection with the work and administration of the
Department/School as the appropriate
Dean/University Librarian may assign her/him, and as are consistent with her/his status as a Member of the Bargaining
Unit.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 184

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(n) The Chair/Director shall not be required to sign-off or approve the annual reports of
Members of the Department/School. Neither shall the Chair/Director be required to review or approve Member
applications for reimbursement for Professional
Development Expenditures (Article 6.45 –
Professional Development Expenditures and
Article 4.70 – Professional Development
Expenditures for Sessional Members). The
Professional Development Expenditures shall be submitted directly to the secretary for the Department/School who shall
in turn submit the reimbursement forms to the
Dean/University Librarian.
ARTICLE 9.15 – SELECTION OF CHAIRS/DIRECTORS
9.15.1 The Chair/Director of a Department/School shall be appointed by the Vice-President, Academic in accordance with
the procedures of this Article. The
Chair/Director shall not serve for more than two (2) consecutive terms.
9.15.2 The following procedures will be initiated by the
Dean/University Librarian at least six (6) months before the end of a term of a Chair/Director or immediately if a post of
Chair/Director becomes vacant.
9.15.3 (a) The Dean/University Librarian shall ensure that there is a selection committee with the following composition,
including a Chair of the committee, in place within five (5) months before the end of a term of a
Chair/Director or immediately if a post of
Chair/Director becomes vacant:
(i) One third (1/3) of the full-time teaching/librarian Members of the
Department/School to the nearest whole number. The members of the committee shall be tenured or probationary
appointments, if possible, and shall be elected by all the full-time teaching/librarian
Members of the Department/School.
(ii) The Dean/University Librarian as a non-voting member.
(iii) The Chair/Director of another
Department/School appointed by the
Dean/University Librarian in consultation with the
Department/School seeking a
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 185

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Chair/Director.
(iv) At least one (1) member of the committee shall be a woman. Where the Department/School has no women members
and no woman is otherwise on the committee, the
Dean/University Librarian, in consultation with the
Department/School shall appoint a woman member in addition to those described above.
(b) The Committee shall elect a Chair from among its members.
9.15.4 The Chair of the Selection Committee shall use all reasonable efforts to invite all full-time Members of the
Department/School (including those on leave) to submit to her/him, within a specified period of time, in confidence, the
names of possible candidates and reasons supporting their candidature. Without disclosing the names of the individuals
submitting them, these names and reasons shall be communicated to the Selection Committee.
9.15.5 In the event that no candidates are submitted by the
Department/School within ten (10) working days of the Selection Committee's request, the Committee may suggest a
short list of its own or make a request to the Vice-President, Academic to search for a candidate from outside the
Department/School or the University. In the latter instance, the
Department/School shall be consulted for the names of possible outside candidates.
9.15.6 (a) The Selection Committee, after undertaking any further inquiries that it deems appropriate and relevant shall
establish a short list of not fewer than two (2) and not more than three (3) candidates, unless it is convinced that it can find
only one suitable candidate.
(b) The selection committee shall evaluate candidates on the grounds of proven administrative ability, scholarly activity,
and teaching/librarian competence. The
Selection Committee will be guided by
Article 9.10 – Duties of Chairs/Directors in making this evaluation. The Committee may wish to meet with the candidates.
(c) Prior to the compilation of its final short list, the Selection Committee will obtain, in writing, the consent of the
candidates on that list.
(d) The Department/School may wish to meet with the short-listed candidates prior to the
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 186

Collective Agreement 2008-11 balloting process.
9.15.7 Within ten (10) working days from the final receipt of names from the Department/School as per clause
9.15.4 above, the Chair of the Selection Committee shall make all reasonable efforts to provide all full-time Members of
the Department/School, including those on leave, with a ballot. The ballot shall set out the short list of candidates. The
Members shall indicate their one (1) preferred choice, in confidence, to the Chair of the Selection
Committee within fifteen (15) working days from the distribution date noted on the ballot. The ballots shall be opened and
counted in the presence of the
Selection Committee.
9.15.8 In the event the Selection Committee finds only one
(1) suitable candidate, the Chair of the Selection
Committee shall use all reasonable efforts to submit to all the full-time Members of the
Department/School, including those on leave, a ballot showing this candidate's name. Time limits for this submission and
the Member's responses shall be as set out in clause 9.15.7 above. The ballots shall be opened and counted in the
presence of the Selection Committee.
9.15.9 The Chair of the Selection Committee shall report the results of the selection process and its recommendation to
the Dean/University Librarian.
9.15.10 If the Dean/University Librarian is prepared to accept the Selection Committee's recommendation then the
Dean/University Librarian will forward this recommendation together with her/his own to the
Vice-President, Academic who will make the appointment.
9.15.11 Should the Dean/University Librarian not be prepared to accept the Selection Committee's recommendation, the
Dean/University Librarian shall indicate her/his reservations to the Selection
Committee and the Department/School. If the
Dean/University Librarian and the Selection
Committee are unable to agree on an appointment, the selection procedure shall be reinstituted as in clause 9.15.3
above.
9.15.12 The Chair/Director shall be a tenured or probationary Member of faculty. Any outside appointment shall be made
in accordance with
Article 5.20 – Appointment and Renewal.
9.15.13 In exceptional circumstances the Vice-President,
Academic and the Dean/University Librarian, after
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 187

Collective Agreement 2008-11 consultation with a Department/School, may appoint an acting Chair/Director for a period
of up to four (4) months, consistent with Article 9.20 – Term of Office of Chairs/Directors and Article 9.30 –
Removal from Office of Chairs/Directors.
9.15.14 Abbreviated Selection Process
In many selection processes, it is apparent at step 4
(clause 9.15.4 above) that a strong consensus has emerged for the selection of one (1) candidate. In that event, the
Selection Committee may proceed directly to step 8 (clause 9.15.8 above) of the procedure. If at least two (2) Members
object to the abbreviated selection process, then the Committee shall follow the full procedure.
ARTICLE 9.20 – TERM OF OFFICE OF CHAIRS/DIRECTORS
9.20.1 The term of office for Chairs/Directors shall normally be for three (3) years, renewable by
Department/School selection per Article 9.15 –
Selection of Chairs/Directors.
9.20.2 Should Chairs/Directors not be able to carry out their duties for four (4) months or less, the
Chairs/Directors shall make provision for the take- over of their duties in consultation with the
Department/School and Dean/University Librarian.
9.20.3 If the absence is for a period of longer than four (4) months, the Chairs/Directors shall relinquish her/his title and a
new Chair/Director shall be selected according to the procedures set out in Article 9.15 –
Selection of Chairs/Directors.
ARTICLE 9.25 – TEACHING LOAD REDUCTIONS AND
STIPENDS FOR CHAIRS/DIRECTORS
9.25.1 (a) The Chair/Director shall be entitled to a six
(6) credit teaching load reduction during each calendar year served as Chair/Director.
For Departments/Schools with twenty-five
(25) or more full-time Members and employees (as defined in clause 9.25.2 below), Chairs/Directors shall receive an
additional three (3) credit course reduction.
Where the Dean has assigned a full teaching load with the agreement of the Member, an overload payment (or proportion
thereof) will be made in lieu thereof. Where the
University Librarian has assigned a greater than normal workload with the agreement of the Member, an overload
payment (or proportion thereof) will be made.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 188

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(b) The Chair/Director may voluntarily waive these entitlements, in full or in part.
9.25.2 The Chair/Director will be entitled to an annual stipend for each full year served. Portions of a year will be
pro-rated. An acting Chair/Director shall receive a pro-rated stipend in lieu of the
Chair/Director for each full month served in excess of the first month. The stipend shall be based on the number of
full-time teaching/librarian Members in the Department/School and the number of other full-time equivalent employees
(secretaries, technical staff, etc.) who report to the
Chair/Director. For purposes of administration of this Article, the Chair/Director shall indicate to the
Dean/University Librarian as of September 1 of each year the category under which she/he should be compensated.
Changes occurring after
September 1 shall be reflected in the following year.
If the Dean/University Librarian agrees with the category under which a Chair/Director is to be compensated, the
Dean/University Librarian will forward this information to the Vice-President,
Academic. If the Dean/University Librarian does not agree with the category and the disagreement cannot be resolved,
the Vice-President, Academic will rule on the matter. The ruling of the Vice-
President, Academic shall not be grievable.
9.25.3 Full-time teaching/librarian Members and other full- time employees (compensation per year):
One to nine $2,250
(1 – 9)
Ten to nineteen $3,250
(10 – 19)
Twenty to twenty-nine $4,250
(20 – 29)
Thirty and over $5,250
(30 – )
9.25.4 In lieu of compensation, the Chair/Director may elect to receive the whole or part of the stipend in the form of an
equivalent enhancement to the professional allowance. The Chair/Director will indicate her/his intentions in this matter by
September 1 of each year.
9.25.5 In addition to the above compensation, the
Chair/Director shall be entitled to a credit of one (1) year toward her/his sabbatical for a completed three
(3) year term.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 189

Collective Agreement 2008-11
ARTICLE 9.30 – REMOVAL FROM OFFICE OF
CHAIRS/DIRECTORS
9.30.1 Proceedings for the removal of the Chair/Director may be initiated by:
(a) A written complaint to the Dean/University
Librarian specifying the reasons for the complaint, signed by at least a majority of the full-time faculty of the
Department/School, excluding those on leave and the
Chair/Director herself/himself. The
Dean/University Librarian shall investigate the situation and offer her/his services to resolve the matter. If the attempt is
unsuccessful, the
Dean/University Librarian will forward the written complaint together with her/his report to the Vice-President, Academic.
or
(b) A written complaint by the Dean/University
Librarian to the Vice-President, Academic specifying the grounds for the complaint. The grounds for such complaints
should normally be related to Articles 9.10 – Duties of
Chairs/Directors and Article 5.15 – Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of Academics.
9.30.2 The Vice-President, Academic shall invite the
Chair/Director and the Department/School to discuss the complaint. Following an adequate investigation, the
Vice-President, Academic may request the
Chair/Director to relinquish their office. If the
Chair/Director are not requested to relinquish their office the Department/School or the Dean/University
Librarian may request initiation of procedures under paragraph 9.30.3 (c) below.
9.30.3 If the Chair/Director does not voluntarily resign as
Chair/Director:
(a) The Vice-President, Academic is empowered to suspend that individual as Chair/Director.
Once suspended, the Member retains all other rights and responsibilities as defined in this Collective Agreement.
(b) The Vice-President, Academic shall instruct the Dean/University Librarian to appoint an
Acting-Chair/Director in consultation with the
Department/School in accordance with Article
9.15 – Selection of Chairs/Directors and shall forward the complaint to the President in the form of an appeal.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 190

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(c) The President shall create an ad hoc committee to investigate the complaint and shall conduct its investigation in
accordance with statutory requirements. As a result of the committee's investigation, the President shall rule on the
question of removal from office.
(d) The decision of the President shall be final, non-grievable and binding on all parties.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 191

Collective Agreement 2008-11
REDUNDANCY AND FINANCIAL EXIGENCY
ARTICLE 10.10 – REDUNDANCY
10.10.1 For the purposes of this Article, the declaration of a state of redundancy by the Employer shall mean that the
number of Members employed in a particular
Department/School(s) must be reduced. The
Employer agrees that no procedures other than those specified in this Article will be used to deal with redundancies as
defined in clause 10.10.3 below. It is understood that the term redundancy does not apply to limited term appointments
that carry no implication of renewal or continuation beyond the stated term in accordance with Article 5.20 –
Appointment and Renewal.
10.10.2 The Employer shall declare a state of redundancy by sending a written notice to the Union and to the
Vice-President, Academic that it has approved a resolution for one of the reasons outlined in clause
10.10.3 below. With this notice, the Employer shall submit a detailed report specifying the reasons why the redundancy is
justified and the exact magnitude of the reduction believed to be necessary.
10.10.3 A declaration of redundancy by the Employer may be initiated in one of two (2) ways:
(a) Senate may resolve to terminate a Faculty,
Department/School or program for reasons other than Financial Exigency. For the purpose of this Article, a program is
defined as a course of study previously approved by the Senate and leading to a degree or a diploma. Should the
program involve more than one Faculty or Department/School, the plural should be understood in the following clauses. If
the Employer resolves to approve
Senate's decision, then a program redundancy shall be declared.
(b) The Vice-President, Academic may make a submission to the Employer that a particular
Department(s)/School(s) has (have) a larger number of Members than necessary to fulfil its (their) program and service
teaching requirements in the light of student demand.
Such a redundancy shall be known as a workload redundancy. The Employer agrees that it will not declare a workload
redundancy if such an action will result in insufficient academic personnel for that
Department(s)/School(s) to continue to offer a
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 192

Collective Agreement 2008-11 viable program(s). The onus shall be on the
Employer to show that the proposed reductions are consistent with normal workloads as defined in Article 5.40 –
Academic Workload and that the proposed reductions will not create an inequitable workload for the
Department(s)/School(s) affected by the redundancies.
10.10.4 Redundancies may be justified only for bona fide academic reasons and/or on the grounds of insufficient student
demand. When insufficient student demand is used as a justification, such lack of demand must be demonstrable over a
period of at least three (3) years and projections into the future must not indicate any appreciable increase in this student
demand.
10.10.5 As a result of the Employer's declaration, a
Redundancy Committee shall be formed. This
Committee shall hold its first meeting within fifteen
(15) days of receipt by the Union of the Employer's notice as specified in clause 10.10.2 hereof. Within ten (10) days of
receipt of that notice, the Union shall forward to the Vice-President, Academic the names of three (3) Members who shall
serve on the
Redundancy Committee.
10.10.6 The Redundancy Committee shall include the following:
(a) Three (3) Members chosen by the Union
(b) Three (3) individuals named by the Employer
(c) The Vice-President, Academic as non-voting
Chair
10.10.7 Within sixty (60) days of its first meeting, the
Redundancy Committee shall make its final report to the Employer (with a copy to the Union). The
Employer shall make no new academic or administrative appointments nor shall the Employer order the reduction or
redistribution of the actual number of full-time Members of the Bargaining Unit, until the Redundancy Committee has
made its final report or until the time limit of sixty (60) days stated in this clause has expired, whichever comes first.
10.10.8 It shall be the responsibility of the Redundancy
Committee in consultation with the Vice-President,
Academic, the Dean/University Librarian and the
Faculty/Library Personnel Committee to recommend who, among the Members of the
Department(s)/School(s) under consideration, shall be affected by redundancy.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 193

Collective Agreement 2008-11
10.10.9 Keeping in mind that the continuing academic function assigned to the Department/School is of the highest
priority, the Redundancy Committee shall consider the following steps in the following order:
(a) Non-renewal of limited term appointments within the Department/School.
(b) Non-renewal of two (2) year probationary contracts within the Department/School.
(c) Non-renewal of contracts of Members within the Department/School on three (3) year probationary contracts.
(d) Removal of a tenured Member from the
Department/School.
10.10.10 If the Redundancy Committee decides that Members with tenure or on a three (3) year probationary contract will
be affected by Redundancy pursuant to clause 10.10.9 hereof, it shall include, in its final recommendation to the
Employer, a list of administrative and academic areas to which the
Members could be transferred, with or without a year's retraining, considering their academic and professional
qualifications.
10.10.11 If the Employer approves a resolution to act on the
Redundancy Committee's recommendation that a
Member be declared redundant, then the Employer shall send the Member a written notice of its resolution. This notice
shall also contain an offer to the tenured Member of the following options:
(a) Voluntary early retirement if the Member is age fifty-five (55) or more.
(b) Transfer in whole or in part to another
Department/School for which the Member is academically qualified or could become qualified with a year's retraining if the
transfer can be effected by one (1) of the following means:
(i) Filling a vacancy
(ii) Non-renewal of a limited term contract
(iii) Non-renewal of a two (2) year probationary contract
(iv) Non-renewal of contract of Members on three (3) year probationary contract in the Department/School to which the
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 194

Collective Agreement 2008-11 tenured Member is to be transferred.
(c) Transfer to an appropriate administrative vacancy in the University.
(d) Termination of employment with severance pay.
(e) Any other alternative that may be implemented in the future with the mutual consent of the two Parties.
Any of the above options shall be implemented in accordance with the terms of this Article. All proposed transfers to
another Department/School must have the approval of the Vice-President,
Academic. If the offer is to transfer one (1) component of the Member's workload (this component restricted to either
teaching or research) to another academic area, such offer shall include a statement of the duties of that Member and a
method of weighing the Member's evaluation for merit based on these special arrangements.
If the Employer cannot offer at least one (1) of paragraphs 10.10.11 (b) or (c) above, it shall offer to keep the Members in
their present position until such time as it can offer them one (1) of paragraphs
10.10.11 (b) or (c) above unless clause 10.10.16 below applies.
10.10.12 Notwithstanding Article 5.20 – Appointment and
Renewal, Members with a two (2) year, initial probationary appointment can be refused the second probationary
appointment for reasons of redundancy in accordance with clauses 10.10.9 or 10.10.11 above. In such instances, the
Members shall receive notice by December 15 of the academic year in which their contract comes up for renewal. A
written notice of non-renewal shall be sent to the Members in which redundancy shall be clearly stated as the reason for
non-renewal.
10.10.13 Notwithstanding Article 5.20 – Appointment and
Renewal and Article 5.60 – Tenure Evaluation
Procedures, Members who are on a three (3) year probationary appointment can be refused a renewal of their
appointment and/or tenure for reasons of redundancy in accordance with clauses 10.10.9 or
10.10.11 above. In such instances, the Members shall receive notice by December 15 of the academic year in which their
contract comes up for renewal. A written notice shall be sent to the Members in which redundancy shall be clearly stated
as the reason for non-renewal and/or refusal to grant tenure. They shall be given severance pay in accordance with
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 195

Collective Agreement 2008-11 clause 10.10.18 hereof as well as recall rights in accordance with clause 10.10.18 below.
10.10.14 Tenured Members who accept a transfer to another academic area in whole or in part, shall retain their rank as
well as all pre-existing employment rights. If such a transfer requires retraining, the Members shall be granted leave to a
maximum of one (1) year at one hundred percent (100%) salary plus benefits.
Any tuition fees connected with the retraining shall be paid by the University.
10.10.15 Tenured Members who accept a transfer to an administrative position in accordance with paragraph
10.10.11 (c) hereof cease to be Members of the
Bargaining Unit on the date that the transfer becomes effective. Members transferred to an administrative position shall
not be dismissed for a period of five (5) years for reasons other than just cause and shall retain for this period the full
rights of
Members of this Union, to grieve dismissal for cause. Such Members shall not have their pay decreased as a result of the
transfer but they shall receive only the basic percentage increase to salary scale and no increments until the normal
salary level for their administrative position has reached their own. For a period of five (5) years from the date of their
appointment to the administrative position, the
Members shall have first right of refusal of any academic vacancy within Laurentian for which they are judged by the
Vice-President, Academic to be academically competent.
10.10.16 Where a redundancy results from the termination of a program as per paragraph 10.10.3 (a) above and when all
transfer provisions have been exhausted, the Employer may lay-off a tenured Member provided that those Members who
are at least forty-five (45) years of age, have tenure and in respect of whom the sum of years of seniority from the
effective date of tenure plus age equals fifty-five (55) shall be exempt from lay-off.
Costs associated with any arbitration arising out of lay-off shall be distributed in accordance with Article
11.15 – Arbitration Procedure. The usual burden of proof shall apply.
10.10.17 Groups and/or individuals who are selected for redundancy may grieve their selection (under Article
11.10 – Grievance Procedure) on the grounds of bias or procedural error, as well as on the grounds that the criteria for
selection have been applied in a
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 196

Collective Agreement 2008-11 manner which is discriminatory or is in bad faith.
This right to grieve includes the right to challenge the validity of the redundancy but not the right to challenge the
Employer's authority to initiate
Redundancy procedures.
Tenured Members who wish to remain in the employ of the University and who have been offered transfer but do not wish
to accept the offer must grieve this transfer within thirty (30) days of receipt of the offer.
If the Arbitration Board concludes that the Members' refusal is well founded, the Members retain their original positions. If
the Arbitration Board concludes that the Members' refusal are not well founded or that another suitable transfer is
available, then the
Members must accept the transfer within thirty (30) days of receiving a copy of the decision or else the
Members' employment shall be terminated. The effective date of notice shall be the date that the arbitrator's report is
received by the Members. The
Members shall retain recall and notice of termination rights but shall lose their rights to all severance payments and
benefits.
10.10.18 All Members who are on tenured or three (3) year probationary appointments, and whose appointments are
terminated pursuant to this Article shall have rights as set out hereafter:
(a) (i) Twelve (12) months' notice in writing or any equivalent combination of notice plus salary followed by
(ii) Six (6) months' salary plus one (1) month's salary for each year as a full-time employee provided that no
Member on a three (3) year probationary appointment receives less than nine (9) months' salary and no tenured Member
receives less than eighteen (18) months' salary.
All payments under this clause shall be based on the Members' total regular salary including the University's contribution
to pension and other benefit plans for their final full academic year of service at the University. In no case shall the
number of months' salary paid under this clause exceed the time remaining until the normal retirement age of the
Member.
(b) First right of refusal of all academic vacancies within Laurentian University, for which they have academic competence
as judged by the
Vice-President, Academic in consultation with the Department/School to which the individual
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 197

Collective Agreement 2008-11 is to be appointed for a period of three (3) years for a Member on a three (3) year
probationary appointment and five (5) years for a tenured Member from the effective date of termination. Individuals who
accept such positions shall return to the University at the rank they held when their appointments were terminated, with
full recognition for years of service at Laurentian. Disputes arising out of these recall procedures are referable to the
grievance and arbitration process set out in this Collective Agreement.
Individuals who are recalled pursuant to this
Article shall have up to thirty (30) days to accept such recall offer, and shall terminate their alternative employment and
take up the offered post, as soon as they are contractually able to do so but in no instance later than six
(6) months after accepting the recall offer.
(c) Reasonable efforts by the Employer to assist a laid-off Member in obtaining suitable alternative employment including
the use of professional assistance as well as access to
University resources.
(d) Reasonable access to library, laboratory and computer facilities subject to the agreement of the Dean/University
Librarian concerned until suitable alternative employment is secured or for three (3) years in the case of a Member on a
three (3) year probationary appointment or for five (5) years in the case of a tenured
Member if suitable alternative employment has not been secured.
(e) Eligibility for themselves and their dependants for exemption from tuition and Physical
Education fees until suitable alternative employment is secured or for three (3) years in the case of a Member on a three
(3) year probationary appointment or for five (5) years in the case of a tenured Member if suitable alternative employment
has not been secured.
10.10.19 Nothing in this Article shall limit the total amount of severance benefits that a tenured Member might privately
negotiate with the Employer.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 198

Collective Agreement 2008-11
10.10.20 All grievances submitted under the terms of this
Article shall go directly to arbitration in accordance with Article 11.15 – Arbitration Procedure. Unless stated otherwise in
this Article, within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the written notice containing the decision which the Members wish to
grieve, the Members must give notice in writing to the Employer of their intention to submit that decision to Arbitration.
ARTICLE 10.15 – FINANCIAL EXIGENCY
10.15.1 The Board of Governors and the Union agree that the first duty of the University is to ensure that its academic
priorities remain paramount, particularly with regard to the quality of instruction, library service and research, and the
preservation of academic freedom.
10.15.2 For the purposes of this Article, Financial Exigency shall be defined as substantial and recurring deficits, which
threaten the long-term solvency of the
University as a whole.
10.15.3 Reductions in academic staff for reasons of financial exigency shall occur only in extraordinary circumstances,
and only then after efforts to alleviate the financial crisis by economies in all other segments of the budget have been
undertaken and after all reasonable means of improving the
University's revenues have been exhausted.
10.15.4 Members may be laid off in accordance with this
Article only in the event that a state of financial exigency has been both declared and confirmed pursuant to the
procedures contained in this Article.
10.15.5 In the event that the Employer considers that a financial exigency exists, within the meaning of clause 10.15.2
above, it may give notice of such a belief. As of the date of such notice the procedures specified in this Article shall apply,
and no new appointments may be made to either the academic or administrative staff complement.
10.15.6 Within two (2) days of giving notice of its belief that a financial exigency exists, the Board of Governors shall
forward to the Union all financial documentation relevant to the alleged state of financial exigency.
10.15.7 Within fifteen (15) days of the notice specified in clause 10.15.5 above, the Parties shall establish a
Financial Commission which will consider the alleged financial exigency and either (a) confirm it (under whatever
conditions it chooses to impose) or (b)
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 199

Collective Agreement 2008-11 reject it.
10.15.8 The Financial Commission shall be chosen as is an
Arbitration Board per Article 11.15 – Arbitration
Procedure. It is agreed that in this instance no
Member of the Financial Commission shall be a government official, and the Minister of Labour, if requested to appoint a
Chair, shall choose a person who is not in the employ of a government. Decisions of the Financial Commission under this
Article shall be final and binding on all Parties. In this regard the
Financial Commission shall be deemed to be an
Arbitration Board.
10.15.9 The onus of proof shall be on the Employer to establish to the satisfaction of the Financial
Commission that a state of financial exigency exists within the meaning of this Article.
10.15.10 Within seven (7) days of the choice of a Chair, the
Financial Commission shall meet and invite and consider submissions on the University's financial condition. Inter alia it
shall consider:
(a) Whether the University's financial position (as evidenced from the total budget and not just the academic or salary
components thereof) constitutes a bona fide budgetary crisis such that deficits projected by generally accepted accounting
principles are expected to continue for more than two (2) fiscal years;
(b) Whether in view of the primacy of academic goals at the University the reduction of academic staff is a reasonable
type of cost saving;
(c) Whether all reasonable means of achieving cost-saving in other areas of the University budget have been explored
and exhausted;
(d) Whether all reasonable means of improving the University's revenue position have been explored and exhausted;
(e) Whether every effort has been made to secure further assistance from the provincial government;
(f) Whether enrolment projections are consistent with a proposed reduction in the academic staff complement;
(g) Whether all means of reducing the academic staff complement including voluntary early
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 200

Collective Agreement 2008-11 retirement, voluntary resignation, voluntary reduced workload, voluntary redeployment and
leaves, etc. have been exhausted, and
(h) Whatever other matters it considers relevant.
10.15.11 The Financial Commission will normally be expected to hand down its Report and deliver a copy to the
Employer and to the Union within sixty (60) days of its first meeting. If the Commission finds that a state of financial
exigency does not exist, no reductions of academic staff for reasons of financial exigency may take place. If the
Commission finds that a financial exigency does exist, its Report shall specify the amount of reduction required, if any, in
the budgetary allocation to salary and benefits for Members of the
Bargaining Unit. Any reduction in the budgetary allocation for academic salaries and benefits may be made conditional
upon the further exploration of alternative cost-saving measures by the University, and the Commission shall remain
seized of its jurisdiction in this matter pending the satisfactory exhaustion of all such specified alternatives. Within five (5)
days of receipt of the Report of the Financial
Commission, the Parties shall meet and confer with respect to its implications.
10.15.12 Pursuant to the ruling of the Financial Commission, the Board of Governors may reduce the budgetary allocation
for salaries and benefits of Members of the
Bargaining Unit but such reduction shall not exceed the amount of the reduction specified by the
Commission. The decision of the Board of
Governors shall be taken and written notice thereof sent to the Financial Commission within two (2) weeks of receipt of
the notice mentioned in clause
10.15.11 above.
10.15.13 Within twenty (20) days the Financial Commission shall apportion among the Faculties, Library and similar units,
the reduction in the budgetary allocation for salaries and benefits of the Members of the
Bargaining Unit. Whenever possible, such reductions will be divided in a proportionate amount among the Faculties and
Library within the University unless there is a clear and substantial reason for doing otherwise.
10.15.14 Within thirty (30) days, the Faculties/Library through their respective Faculty/Library Councils shall apportion the
budgetary reduction among the
Departments/Schools within the Faculty/Library and determine which among its Members are to be laid off. Whenever
possible such reductions will be divided among the units within a Faculty/Library in a
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 201

Collective Agreement 2008-11 proportionate amount unless there is a clear and substantial reason for doing otherwise.
10.15.15 The principal criteria in the termination/lay-off of
Members within a Department, School or similar unit shall be:
(a) The possession of qualifications suitable for the continuing function of the Faculty, School,
Department or Library.
(b) Quality of performance in teaching and research or scholarly activity where applicable.
(c) The possession of qualifications suitable for transfer with or without retraining to another academic or administrative
position within the
University.
(d) Contributions to the wider community.
10.15.16 Within a Department/School, a tenured Member shall not be terminated in preference to a non-tenured
Member. For tenured Members, the more senior
Member, in terms of service determined from the date at which tenure at the University became effective shall be retained
unless, after applying the above criteria, there is a clear and substantial reason for doing otherwise.
10.15.17 Those Members who are at least forty (40) years of age, have tenure and in respect of whom the sum of years
of seniority from the effective date of tenure plus age equals at least fifty-five (55) shall be exempt from lay-off until all
other academic staff within the
Faculty/Library and not included in this category have been laid off.
10.15.18 Should the Faculty/Library Council fail to determine within thirty (30) days who among its Members is to be laid
off, it shall be the responsibility of the
Deans/University Librarian to apportion the budgetary reduction within their Faculty/Library.
Should the Deans/University Librarian fail to make such a decision within seven (7) days, the Financial
Commission shall make the apportionment of the budgetary reduction.
10.15.19 Members who are selected for lay-off under this
Article shall be provided with written notice of the
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 202

Collective Agreement 2008-11 reasons for their selection. Lay-offs under this Article shall not be treated or recorded as
dismissals for cause.
10.15.20 After the selection of the Members who are to be laid off, but prior to the implementation of such lay-offs, the
Employer shall make every reasonable effort to secure positions elsewhere in the University, including administrative
positions, for those Members who are to be laid-off. Members who accept alternative academic employment retain all
pre-existing employment rights, including credit for sabbaticals, salaries and pensions. Members who accept alternative
employment shall be given the opportunity to retrain for a period of up to one (1) year for their new duties. The Employer
shall pay any related tuition fees and full salary to the Member during this retraining period.
10.15.21 Groups and/or individuals who are selected for lay-off by a Faculty/Library Council or Dean/University
Librarian, may grieve their selection under Article
11.10 – Grievance Procedure and Article 11.15 –
Arbitration Procedure on the ground of bias or procedural error, as well as on the grounds that the criteria for lay-off have
been applied in a manner that is discriminatory or is in bad faith. The right to grieve does not include the right to challenge
the validity of the financial exigency.
10.15.22 All tenured and probationary Members whose appointments are terminated pursuant to this Article shall have
rights as set out hereafter:
(a) (i) The University shall be obliged to offer twelve (12) months’ notice or twelve
(12) months' salary in lieu of notice followed by;
(ii) One (1) month's salary for each year as a full-time employee provided that no tenured Member shall receive less than
twelve (12) month's salary.
All payments under this clause shall be based on the Members' total salary including the
University's contribution to pension and other benefit plans for their final full academic year of service at the University. In
no case shall the number of months' salary paid under this clause exceed the time remaining until the normal retirement
age of the Member.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 203

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(b) First right of refusal of all academic vacancies within Laurentian University, for which they have academic competence
as judged by the
Vice-President, Academic in consultation with the Department/School to which the individual is to be appointed for a
period of three (3) years from the effective date of termination.
Individuals who accept such positions shall return to the University at the rank they held when they were laid off, with full
recognition for years of service at Laurentian. Disputes arising out of these recall procedures are referable to the
Grievance and Arbitration process set out in this Collective Agreement.
Individuals who are recalled pursuant to this
Article shall have up to thirty (30) days to accept such recall offer, and shall terminate their alternative employment and
take up the offered post, as soon as they are contractually able to do so but in no instance later than six
(6) months after accepting the recall offer.
(c) Reasonable efforts by the Employer to assist a laid-off Member in obtaining alternative employment including the use
of professional assistance as well as access to University resources.
(d) Reasonable access to Library, laboratory and computer facilities subject to the agreement of the Dean/University
Librarian concerned until suitable alternative employment is secured or for three (3) years whichever is less.
(e) Eligibility for themselves and their dependants for exemption from tuition and Physical
Education fees until suitable alternative employment is secured or for three (3) years, whichever is less.
10.15.23 Notice of academic vacancies shall be deemed to be good and sufficient if they are sent by the Board of
Governors to the Member's last known address with a copy to the Union. Any Member who fails to reply within thirty (30)
days or who refuses a permanent position offered under this Article shall lose all rights of recall.
10.15.24 A Member accepting a permanent position at
Laurentian University will no longer receive severance pay.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 204

Collective Agreement 2008-11
10.15.25 Any vacancy that occurs and that cannot be filled through the recall procedures in this Article will be filled in
accordance with the normal hiring practices.
10.15.26 Tenured Members, whose appointments are terminated while they are on leave as in Article 3.2, shall have the
same rights as other tenured Members in accordance with the terms of this Article.
10.15.27 Laid off Members who are recalled shall repay any portion of the allowance specified in clause 10.15.22 above
which exceeds their entitlement had they continued to occupy their normal position.
10.15.28 The cost of the Financial Commission established under this Article shall be borne by the Employer.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 205

Collective Agreement 2008-11
GRIEVANCE AND ARBITRATION
ARTICLE 11.10 – GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
11.10.1 There shall be no discrimination, harassment or coercion, of any kind, practised against any persons involved in
these procedures.
11.10.2 The Union and the Employer agree to make every reasonable effort to settle all grievances in a prompt, just and
equitable manner.
11.10.3 Definitions
(a) Grievance: A "grievance" shall mean any difference arising from the interpretation, application, administration or
alleged violation of the Collective Agreement, including any question as to whether a matter is arbitrable in accordance
with the Labour Relations Act,
1995.
(b) Grievor: The grievor is either the Union which initiates a grievance against the Employer on behalf of a Member or
group of Members or itself, or the Employer which initiates a grievance against the Union, an individual
Member or a group of Members except as otherwise prohibited in this Collective
Agreement.
(c) Individual Grievance: An individual grievance is a grievance initiated by the Union on behalf of an individual Member.
(d) Group Grievance: A group grievance is a grievance initiated by the Union on behalf of a group of Members.
(e) Policy Grievance: A policy grievance is a grievance by a Union which may involve a matter of general policy or of
general application of the Collective Agreement.
(f) Union Grievance: A union grievance is a grievance which directly affects the Union.
(g) Employer Grievance: An employer grievance is a grievance initiated by the Employer.
(h) "Working days": Working days shall mean
Monday through Friday, excluding
Recognised and other Holidays identified in
Article 7.10 – Recognized and Other Holidays including the customary December – January recess, as well as the months
of July and
August.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 206

Collective Agreement 2008-11
11.10.4 The time limits specified in this Article may be extended by mutual agreement by the Parties.
Moreover, an arbitrator shall have the power to waive time limits. The amended time limits must be specified in writing.
11.10.5 Notwithstanding clause 11.10.2 above, a grievor shall have recourse to the grievance procedures set out below if
such grievor is convinced that no settlement can be reached by informal means, unless otherwise specified in this
Collective Agreement.
11.10.6 All communications required under these procedures shall be in writing and shall be delivered by registered mail
or with written proof of receipt.
11.10.7 No technical violation or irregularity occasioned by clerical, typographical or technical error in the written
specification of the grievance shall prevent the substance of a grievance from being heard and judged on its merits.
11.10.8 All Parties to a grievance shall be bound by and shall promptly implement all decisions arrived at under the
procedures described in this Article.
11.10.9 Applicability of Grievance Procedures
(a) The following decisions will not be subject to grievance:
(i) Non-renewal of term appointments as per Article 5.20 – Appointment and
Renewal;
(ii) The award of a merit increment as per
Article 8.25 – Merit Increments.
(b) The following decisions will be subject to grievance only in the case of allegations of either violations of academic
freedom, significant procedural irregularities or discrimination:
(i) The non-renewal of a probationary appointment when the Vice-President,
Academic confirms a negative recommendation of an
FPC/FFPC/LPC;
(ii) The denial of a first application for promotion to a particular rank when the Vice-President, Academic confirms a
negative recommendation of an
FPC/FFPC/LPC (and the denial of a second application for promotion
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 207

Collective Agreement 2008-11 where the two (2) applications are made in consecutive years);
(iii) The denial of an early application for tenure when the Vice-President,
Academic confirms a negative recommendation of an
FPC/FFPC/LPC;
(iv) The decision of the Vice-President,
Academic, regarding academic workload as per paragraph 5.40.6 (d) of Article 5.40 – Academic Workload.
(c) Grievances concerning Renewal as per
Article 5.20 – Appointment and Renewal, concerning tenure as per Article 5.60 –
Tenure Evaluation Procedures, and concerning promotion as per Article 5.65 –
Promotion Procedures, shall proceed directly to arbitration as set forth in Article 11.15 –
Arbitration Procedure.
(d) Grievances concerning dismissal as per
Article 5.80 – Dismissal Procedures shall proceed directly to Step 2 – Formal Grievance
Procedure as set forth in this Article.
11.10.10 Step 1 – Informal Grievance Procedure
The Union and the Employer agree to make reasonable efforts to settle grievances promptly by informal and amicable
means. Thus, the grievor shall first attempt to get the matter under question resolved by informal means within thirty (30)
working days of the date upon which the grievor had notice of the event or decision giving rise to the grievance.
This would normally involve contacting the
Dean/University Librarian concerned before bringing the matter to the Vice-President, Academic.
However, this does not preclude making the Vice-
President, Academic aware of such a grievance, nor does it preclude a grievance from being addressed to the
Vice-President, Academic initially or early on in the process.
11.10.11 Step 2 – Formal Grievance Procedure
(a) The grievor shall present a notice of grievance in writing to the Vice-President,
Academic in the case of a Member, or to the
President of the Union in the case of the
Employer, within thirty (30) working days of the date upon which the grievor had notice of the event or decision giving rise
to the grievance. The notice of grievance shall
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 208

Collective Agreement 2008-11 specify the matter(s) in dispute, the article(s) alleged to have been violated, and the
remedy sought.
(b) In the event of a grievance concerning renewal, tenure or promotion as per paragraph 11.10.9 (c) above, the notice of
grievance shall also include the name of the grievor’s appointee to the Arbitration Panel.
(c) No later than fifteen (15) working days following the receipt of the grievance, the
Employer representative shall meet with the
Union representative. The Parties shall make every reasonable attempt to resolve the grievance.
(d) If the grievance is resolved at this stage, such settlement shall be reduced to writing and countersigned by the Union
representative and the Employer representative within fifteen
(15) working days of the meeting at which the settlement was reached.
(e) In the event that the Union representative and the Employer representative cannot resolve the grievance within fifteen
(15) working days of the meeting(s) specified in paragraph
11.10.11 (c), the Employer representative shall forward in writing to the Union representative the reasons for denying the
grievance.
ARTICLE 11.15 – ARBITRATION PROCEDURE
11.15.1 (a) Failing settlement and/or timely response under the foregoing grievance procedure, any grievance may then
be submitted to arbitration as hereinafter provided under its own distinct arbitral procedure. If no written request for
arbitration is received within thirty
(30) working days after the decision of the
Vice President, Academic or the Union
President under Step 2 – Formal Grievance
Procedure of the grievance procedure is given, the grievance shall be deemed to have been abandoned.
(b) When either Party requests that any matter be submitted to Arbitration as provided in this Article, it shall make such
request in writing addressed to the other Party of this
Collective Agreement, and at the same time appoint a nominee. Within fifteen (15) working days thereafter, the other
Party shall appoint its nominee, provided however, that if such Party fails to appoint its nominee as herein required, the
Minister of Labour for
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 209

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Ontario shall have the power to make such appointment upon application thereto by the
Party invoking the arbitration procedure. The two (2) nominees shall attempt to agree upon a chairperson of the
Arbitration Board.
If they are unsuccessful in agreeing upon such a chairperson within a period of twenty
(20) working days of the appointment of the second nominee, they shall request the
Minister of Labour for Ontario to appoint a chairperson.
(c) The time limits specified in this Article may be extended by mutual agreement by the
Parties. However, the thirty (30) working day time limit set out in paragraph 11.15.1
(a) above referring a grievance to arbitration shall not be waived and/or extended pursuant to the Labour Relations Act,
1995.
Moreover, an arbitrator shall be bound by this provision.
(d) Saturdays, Sundays, Recognised and other
Holidays identified in Article 7.10 –
Recognized and Other Holidays including the customary December – January recess as well as the months of July and
August are not to be counted in the time limits set out in this
Article.
11.15.2 No person may be appointed to the Arbitration
Board who has been involved in an attempt to negotiate or settle the grievance.
11.15.3 The Arbitration Board shall not be authorized to make any decisions inconsistent with the provisions of this
Collective Agreement, nor to alter, modify, add to, or amend any part of this Collective
Agreement.
11.15.4 No matter may be submitted to arbitration which has not been properly carried through all requisite steps of the
Grievance Procedure hereinbefore set out unless otherwise agreed to in writing between the Parties.
11.15.5 The proceedings of the Arbitration Board will be expedited by the Parties hereto, and the decision of the majority
and, where there is no majority, the decision of the chairperson will be final and binding upon the Parties hereto, and the
Employee or
Employees concerned.
11.15.6 Each of the Parties hereto will bear the expenses of the nominee appointed by it, and the Parties will share
equally the fees and expenses, if any, of the chairperson of the Arbitration Board.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 210

Collective Agreement 2008-11
11.15.7 Wherever the term “Arbitration Board” is referred to in this Collective Agreement, the Parties hereto may mutually
agree, in writing, to substitute a mutually agreeable arbitrator for the Arbitration Board at the time of reference to
arbitration and the other provisions referring to Arbitration Board shall appropriately apply.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 211

Collective Agreement 2008-11
STRIKES AND LOCKOUTS
ARTICLE 12.10 – STRIKES AND LOCKOUTS
12.10.1 The University and the Union hereby agree that there shall not be, during the currency of this Collective
Agreement, any lockout by the University or any strike by Members of the Union.
12.10.2 A Member shall not be dismissed per Article 5.80 –
Dismissal Procedures or disciplined per Article 5.75 –
Disciplinary Measures for refusing to cross a picket line on campus which has been established in full compliance with
existing laws. The Employer may, however, dock such a Member's salary by one three hundred and sixty-fifth (1/365) for
each day lost.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 212

Collective Agreement 2008-11
VALIDITY, DURATION AND CONTINUANCE OF THE
COLLECTIVE AGREEMENT
ARTICLE 13.10 – VALIDITY OF THE COLLECTIVE
AGREEMENT
13.10.1 In the event of any of the provisions of this Collective
Agreement or any practices established hereby being contrary to the provisions of any applicable law hereinafter enacted,
this Collective Agreement shall not be deemed to be abrogated, but shall be amended so as to conform with the
regulations of any such law.
ARTICLE 13.15 – DURATION AND CONTINUANCE OF THE
COLLECTIVE AGREEMENT
13.15.1 This Collective Agreement shall come into effect upon ratification by the Parties and shall continue in effect to
June 30, 2011 and shall continue from year to year thereafter unless either Party gives the other
Party notice in writing, not more than one hundred and fifty (150) days but not less than one hundred and twenty (120)
days prior to the thirtieth (30th) of
June in 2011 or in any year following June 30, 2011, that it desires to amend or terminate this Collective
Agreement.
13.15.2 If notice is given as provided in clause 13.15.1 above, the two Parties to this Collective Agreement shall meet
within ten (10) days.
13.15.3 During any period of negotiations, this Collective
Agreement shall remain in force. If a new Collective
Agreement has not been ratified by both Parties by
June 30 of the year in which notice has been given as provided for in clause 13.15.1 above, then all the provisions of this
Collective Agreement shall continue in force (but these provisions shall not constitute a
Collective Agreement) until either:
(a) A new Collective Agreement has been ratified by both Parties. or
(b) Following conciliation, a strike or lockout is declared in accordance with the Ontario
Labour Relations Act, 1995.
13.15.4 At least ten (10) days before the termination of this
Collective Agreement, a separate memorandum which shall continue in force thereafter, shall be signed by the Parties to
the effect that in the event of a strike or lockout,
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 213

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(a) Members whose ongoing research requires access to University facilities in order to prevent irreparable damage to
research facilities (such as loss of live and/or decomposable materials) shall be allowed access to the facilities usually
associated with such research. Such access will be limited to maintaining the facilities and shall not be used to continue
the research. Such Members shall give notice in writing of their access requirements to the President of the Union and to
their Deans/University Librarian. Such notice will normally be given at least ten (10) days before the date of termination of
the
Collective Agreement.
(b) The Union will assume the costs of maintaining Members' eligibility in the
University's hospital, extended health and dental care plans.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 214

Collective Agreement 2008-11
APPENDIX A-1
[1995 OLRB Designation of the Bargaining Unit]
ONTARIO LABOUR RELATIONS BOARD
FILE NO. 3328-93-R
BETWEEN:
Laurentian University Faculty Association "Applicant" v.
Laurentian University of Sudbury "Responding Party"
BEFORE:
Kevin Whitaker, Vice-Chair, and
Board Members J.A. Rundle and P.V. Grasso.
DECISION OF THE BOARD:
October 31, 1995
1. This is an application for combination of bargaining units pursuant to section 7(1) of the Labour Relations
Act to which the responding party has consented.
2. The applicant seeks the combination of two bargaining units consisting of employees of the responding party all of
whom are represented by the applicant trade union.
3. Having regard to the agreement of the parties dated
October 26, 1995, and the provisions of section 7(1) of the Act, the combination of the units requested is granted. The
applicant's bargaining rights now pertain to the following combined bargaining unit:
All members of faculty, including professional librarians, employed by Laurentian University of
Sudbury in the Regional Municipality of Sudbury, save and except administrators at or above the rank of director,
academic staff, at or above the rank of dean, registrar, special assistant to the president, director of academic staff
relations, translators, director of the library, director of graduate studies and research, members of the board of governors,
and athletic coaches required as part of their duties to teach degree credit activity courses.
For the purposes of clarity the parties agree that:
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 215

Collective Agreement 2008-11
1) The bargaining unit does not include full-time faculty members employed by Laurentian
University for a period of not more than one year while on leave from another university, persons employed through the
centre for continuing education to conduct instruction at off-campus centres located outside the
Regional Municipality of Sudbury or through distance education delivery modes, persons employed to teach courses
intended primarily for students who are not registered in a degree credit programme, persons assigned responsibility for
teaching portions of courses coordinated by regular faculty members, such as teaching assistants, field consultants in
social work, clinical teachers in nursing, laboratory technicians, clinical instructors, or outdoor school instructors.
2) The designation "members of the faculty including librarians" is deemed to include those aforementioned employees of
Laurentian University who from time to time may be required to teach outside the City of
Sudbury, unless otherwise excluded.
4. The effective date of this combination of the said bargaining units should be the earlier of (1) the date upon which the
parties become bound by a collective agreement covering the current part-time bargaining unit, or (2) the date upon which
notice to bargain is given by either party with respect to the renewal of the current collective agreement between the
parties covering the full-time bargaining unit.
5. The expiry date of any first collective agreement covering the current part-time bargaining unit shall be the expiry date
of the current collective agreement between the parties in respect of the current full-time bargaining unit, notwithstanding
section 41(8) of the
Labour Relations Act, unless the parties agree otherwise in writing.
"KEVIN WHITAKER" for the Board
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 216

Collective Agreement 2008-11
APPENDIX A-2
[1979 OLRB Designation of the Bargaining Unit (for reference only)]
OLRB CERTIFICATE AND DECISION
THE LABOUR RELATIONS ACT
BEFORE THE ONTARIO LABOUR RELATIONS BOARD
BETWEEN:
Laurentian University Faculty Association "Applicant", -and-
Laurentian University of Sudbury "Respondent".
CERTIFICATE
Upon the application of the applicant and in accordance with the provisions of The Labour
Relations Act, THIS BOARD DOTH CERTIFY
Laurentian University Faculty Association as the bargaining agent of all full-time members of faculty including full-time
professional librarians employed by
Laurentian University of Sudbury, Ontario, to whom at least fifty per cent of the salary at the University is paid by the
University, save and except President,
Vice-President, Academic, Special Assistant to the
President, Deans, Director of the School of Graduate
Studies, Directeur du Conseil de l'enseignement en français, Director of the Library, part-time members of faculty,
technicians, faculty members employed by
Laurentian University for a period of not more than one year while on leave from another university or other employer and
members of the Board of
Governors.
This certificate is to be read subject to the terms of the Board's decision(s) in this matter and, accordingly, by the
bargaining unit described herein is to be read subject to any qualifications referred to in the said decision(s) of the Board.
DATED at Toronto this 9th day of July, 1979.
ONTARIO LABOUR RELATIONS BOARD
“D.K. AYNSLEY”
Registrar
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 217

Collective Agreement 2008-11
APPENDIX A-3
[1979 OLRB Decision (for reference only)]
ONTARIO LABOUR RELATIONS BOARD
FILE NO. 1463-78-R
BETWEEN:
Laurentian University Faculty Association
(Applicant), -and-
Laurentian University of Sudbury (Respondent), -and-
Group of Employees (Objectors).
BEFORE:
Arthur Haladner, Vice-Chair and
Board Members J.D. Bell and W.F. Rutherford.
APPEARANCE:
C.M. Mitchell, T. Bartley and R. Kari for the applicant;
K.R. Valin for the respondent;
Jean Eugene Havel for the objectors.
DECISION OF THE BOARD:
1. On November 27, 1978 the applicant, Laurentian
University Faculty Association, applied for certification for a unit of employees of Laurentian
University. This hearing was called for the purpose of considering an objection to the conduct of the representation vote
taken on April 4, 1979 and for the purpose of hearing representations from the parties on the issue of whether certain
persons classified as
"director" should be included or excluded from the bargaining unit.
2. At the hearing the Board indicated that while it regretted the fact that the ballot in this matter had not been printed in
both French and English, it was not, in the circumstances, prepared to direct a new vote having regard to the delay and
prejudice both to the applicant and to the future course of representation proceedings that such a direction would create.
In so ruling, the Board pointed out that the desire for a
French and English ballot had not been communicated until after the vote had been conducted and the results known.
This, despite there having been, prior to the vote, ample opportunity to express that desire. The Board also expressed its
opinion that the absence of a French and English ballot did not affect the outcome of the representation vote. In that vote
the employees voted 107 to 81 in favour of the applicant.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 218

Collective Agreement 2008-11
3. Dealing now with the issue of Director status - the report of the Labour Relations Officer indicates that for the most part
recommendations for hiring are made by the school's academic council or by the faculty as a group, and submitted to
authorities superior to the director where the decision is made.
Apart from Dean Hilldrup, who made one decision and one effective recommendation - after conducting interviews in
South Africa when the senate appointments and promotions committee was not available - the involvement of directors in
the hiring process is minimal.
4. Directors' role in evaluation of faculty members is primarily one of co-ordination, i.e., calling for recommendations from
other faculty members, the school council or the appointments and promotions committee, and submitting them to higher
authorities.
5. Directors submit recommendations on promotions and tenure; however, there was no evidence that their
recommendations, if contrary, outweigh those of the faculty as a group. Moreover, these recommendations are for the
most part made with the participation of faculty members.
6. Directors' recommendations on salary are limited to whether an increase should be granted. They have no discretion to
recommend specific amounts.
7. Directors' role in discipline of faculty members is minimal, being limited to the occasional reprimand - in one of the two
examples given after consultation with faculty and the Dean/Director of the Library.
Directors have no authority to discharge or suspend.
8. One director made a sabbatical recommendation which, as far as she knew, was accepted. However, the others had no
independent involvement with the process, although one thought he could make a negative recommendation.
9. Directors' role in budget formulation is primarily consultative; in preparing budget recommendations, they consult with
the school budget committee or their colleagues, and decisions are made at the
Senate level. Directors have no authority to re-allocate funds having to do with salaries.
10. Directors assign work to the secretaries on the support staff and evaluate their performance.
However, the time spent in the performance of these
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 219

Collective Agreement 2008-11 functions is minimal, and other faculty members are involved.
11. In Carleton University, (1975) OLRB Rep. June 500, the Board pointed out that there are significant differences
between the university model, where decision-making is shared by a peer group, and the industrial model of hierarchic
authority, where ultimate power resides above - typically, with the plant manager - and filters down through a
management chain to the primary level of supervision - the unit supervisor, or foreman. It stated:
While the Board of Governors is, in a general overall sense, responsible for the business operations of the institution, and
the senate for its academic policies, the power of detailed decision-making is diffuse and extends into the institution's
basic organizational unit, the department.
Moreover, management-type-decisions are made not only by the Board of Governors, the senate, the president, the
senior administrative staff, the deans, but by faculty members as well and in more recent times, students, as members of
various committees or boards...Important determinations of general application are made at the higher levels and in this
sense, a parallel with the industrial model remains. What is novel is that many important decisions, narrower in scope and
having to do with the academic and personnel matters applicable to limited groupings, do originate at the department
level, subject only to endorsation at the higher levels.
12. In determining that department chairmen were employees for purposes of the Act and included in the bargaining unit,
the Board in Carleton concluded:
In those areas of greatest importance, hiring, tenure, promotion, dismissal - the dominant role is played by the department
collectively ... in the more routine areas, while some potential for the exercise of independent discretion exists, it is for the
most part narrowly circumscribed. Moreover, in a substantive sense, the decisions in
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 220

Collective Agreement 2008-11 these areas are of limited importance
... In our view, the infrequent exercise of authority over the office staff poses no danger of conflict of interest within the
unit. It is important to emphasize that the overwhelming proportion of the chairperson's duties have nothing whatever to do
with the supervision or control of the department's small clerical staff...
See also University of Windsor, (1977) OLRB
REP. May, 300, where the Board, following Carleton, determined that department heads did not exercise managerial
functions for purposes of section 1(3) (b) of the Act and were, therefore, appropriate members of the academic bargaining
unit.
13. The Board is of the opinion that the Directors, whose status is in dispute, play a similar role in the decision-making
process at Laurentian to that performed by department chairmen in Carleton and department heads in Windsor. While
there are some differences in certain isolated areas, the Board is satisfied that their duties and responsibilities are not in
any fundamental respect different. The evidence is that they play a part in a process of shared decision-making and do
not, in the areas of greatest importance, i.e., hiring, tenure, promotion, and dismissal, play a dominant role which would
entail the risk of a conflict of interest. Our conclusion, after considering the evidence, is that the Directors of the
School of Engineering, Translators and Interpreters,
Nursing, Social Work, Education and Physical
Education do not exercise managerial functions within the meaning of section 1(3) (b) of The Labour
Relations Act and, accordingly, that they are included in the bargaining unit. The Director of the School of
Graduate Studies and Director, Conseil de l'enseignement en français are excluded from the bargaining unit by
agreement of the parties.
14. Having regard to the foregoing, the Board finds that
All full-time members of faculty including full-time professional librarians employed by Laurentian
University of Sudbury at Sudbury,
Ontario, to whom at least fifty per cent of the salary at the University is paid by the University, save and except
President, Vice-President, Academic,
Deans, Director of the School of
Graduate Studies, Directeur du
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 221

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Conseil de l'enseignement en français,
Director of the Library, part-time members of faculty, technicians, faculty members employed by
Laurentian University for a period of not more than one year while on leave from another university or other employer and
members of the Board of Governors constitute a unit of employees of the respondent appropriate for collective bargaining.
CLARITY NOTES
(1) The designation "all full-time faculty including full-time professional librarians employed by
Laurentian University of Sudbury at Sudbury" is deemed to include those aforementioned employees on the payroll of
Laurentian
University who from time to time may be requested to teach at various locations outside the City of Sudbury.
(2) "All full-time faculty (professional librarians) shall mean such persons holding an academic rank at present described
as instructor, lecturer, assistant professor, associate professor or full professor (general librarian, assistant librarian,
associate librarian or full librarian) and whose duties and responsibilities are fifty per cent or more of the full status
employees in the same classification in the same unit.
15. A certificate will issue to the applicant.
"ARTHUR HALADNER"
For the Board
9th July, 1979
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 222

Collective Agreement 2008-11
APPENDIX A-4 (1)
[1994 OLRB Designation of Sessional Bargaining Unit (for reference only)]
ONTARIO LABOUR RELATIONS BOARD
FILE NO. 3329-93-R
BETWEEN:
Laurentian University Faculty Association, "Applicant" and
Laurentian University of Sudbury, "Responding
Party"
CERTIFICATE:
Upon the application of the applicant and in accordance with the provisions of The Labour
Relations Act, THIS BOARD DOTH CERTIFY
Laurentian University Faculty Association as the bargaining agent of all the faculty including part-time professional
librarians employed by Laurentian
University of Sudbury in the City of Sudbury, save and except administrators at or above the rank of
Director, Academic Staff, at or above the rank of
Dean, Registrar, Special Assistant to the President,
Manager of Employment and Staff Relations,
Translators, Director of the Library, Members of the
Board of Governors and athletic coaches required as part of their duties to teach degree credit activity courses.
This certificate is to be read subject to the terms of the Board's decision(s) in this matter and, accordingly, the bargaining
unit described herein is to be read subject to any qualifications referred to in the said decision(s) of the Board.
DATED AT Toronto, Ontario, this 28th day of March,
1994.
ONTARIO LABOUR RELATIONS BOARD
T.A. INNIS
Registrar
The above description of the bargaining unit is subject to the following qualifications:
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 223

Collective Agreement 2008-11
CLARITY NOTE:
For the purposes of clarity, the parties agree that the bargaining unit does not include full-time faculty on reduced
assignments, persons employed through the
Centre for Continuing Education, persons employed to teach courses primarily for students who are not registered in a
degree credit programme, persons not assigned responsibility for teaching one or more degree credit courses such as
Teaching Assistants,
Field Consultants in Social Work, Clinical Teachers in
Nursing, technicians, laboratory, clinical or outdoor school instructors in courses coordinated by faculty members.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 224

Collective Agreement 2008-11
APPENDIX A-4 (2)
[Prefacing notes in the Memorandum of Agreement adding clauses to the 1992-95 Collective Agreement concerning
employment of Sessional (part-time) faculty (for reference only)]
MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT
BETWEEN:
The Laurentian University Faculty Association and
The Board of Governors of Laurentian University of
Sudbury
RE: Terms and Conditions of Employment of the
Sessional (part-time) Bargaining Unit.
Whereas a decision of the Ontario Labour Relations
Board dated 31 October 1995 (a copy of which is attached as an appendix) and the ratification of this
Memorandum of Agreement give effect to a Merger of the previous Full-time Faculty Bargaining Unit and the previous
Sessional Faculty Bargaining Unit, the
1992-1995 Collective Agreement between the above
Parties, subject to the following variations, shall be read as a single Collective Agreement between the
Parties, covering all Members of the new Merged
Bargaining Unit of Full-time and Sessional Members.
This Memorandum of Agreement shall be in force for the period from 1 July 1994 to 31 March 1996, the latter date being
the date to which LUFA 1992-1995 has been extended, pursuant to a notice given under section 35 of the Social Contract
Act (Bill 48).
Sessional Members of the Bargaining Unit shall be covered by the same Collective Agreement articles as Full-time
Members under Sections 0 (The
Agreement), 1 (Relations Between the Union and the
Board), and 8 (Duration of the Agreement) of the
LUFA 1992-95 Collective Agreement, unless otherwise indicated. Sessional Members of the
Bargaining Unit shall also be covered by Articles 2.00
(Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of Academics -
A1 Teaching and A2 Professional Librarianship, only)
2.30 (Personnel Files), 2.40 (Disciplinary Measures),
3.0 (Recognized and Other Holidays), 3.33 (Court
Leaves), and 3.52 (Compassionate Leave).
Additional Articles relevant to Sessional Members only bear number designations not used in LUFA
1992-95.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 225

Collective Agreement 2008-11
All other provisions, those covered by sections 2, 3,
4, 5, 6, and 7, of the LUFA 1992-95 Collective
Agreement shall apply to Sessional Members only when specifically indicated in this Memorandum of
Agreement.
(The clauses of the Memorandum of Agreement appear at the appropriate places in the 1996-97
Collective Agreement)
DATED AT Sudbury, Ontario, this 17th day of
November, 1995.
For Laurentian University Faculty Association
"R.D. Schell", M.A., D.Phil.
LUFA Chief Steward
"Wendy Jerome", Ph.D.
LUFA President
"Gary MacCoubrey", M.A.
"Leda Culliford", M.A.
For the Board of Governors of Laurentian University of Sudbury
"Hermann Falter", Ph.D.
Director, Academic Staff Relations
"Ron Chrysler", C.A.
Vice-President, Administration
"Geoff Tesson", Ph.D.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 226

Collective Agreement 2008-11
APPENDIX B
LETTER OF UNDERSTANDING
BETWEEN:
THE LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY
ASSOCIATION
AND
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY OF SUDBURY
RE: Faculty Members employed by Laurentian
University on Campuses Outside of Sudbury.
WHEREAS the University is now engaged in providing jointly-run programs with Georgian
College of Applied Arts and Technology, on multiple campuses;
AND WHEREAS such initiatives are likely to occur with greater frequency;
AND WHEREAS the expansion of the University’s programs contributes to the health of the University, and provides
greater opportunities for faculty members;
THEREFORE THE PARTIES AGREE AS
FOLLOWS:
1. All Faculty Members employed by Laurentian
University to teach courses for degree credit shall be included in the Bargaining Unit represented by the Union, if they
would be included in the
Bargaining Unit were they teaching in Sudbury.
Persons affected by this will have departmental status in the academic unit at Laurentian to which their appointment
elsewhere belongs, and that academic unit will be involved in the appropriate tenure and promotion processes according
to the
Collective Agreement. However, the terms of the agreement will be interpreted as site specific, such that, for example,
exigency and seniority clauses will apply to the campus on which the program is being offered.
2. Article 1.30 of the Collective Agreement is hereby amended to read as follows:
“The Board recognizes the Association as the exclusive Bargaining Agent for the Bargaining
Unit(s) defined in the OLRB certificates of July 9,
1979, March 28, 1994, and October 31, 1995
(which are attached as appendices to this
Memorandum of Agreement) and any amendments
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 227

Collective Agreement 2008-11 to these certificates, and as defined in the
Memorandum of Agreement between the Parties respecting Faculty Members employed by
Laurentian University on Campuses Outside of
Sudbury.
3. In the event of a closure of an academic unit or program the tenure-stream Members affected by the decision on
campuses outside Sudbury shall have the right either of transfer to the same Unit or program at the Sudbury campus with
the same rights and privileges as they held at the outside campus or, in the event there are no such positions, of
severance equivalent to that provided for in
Articles 7.1 or 7.2 as applicable.
DATED AT Sudbury, Ontario, this 19th day of
September 2005.
“ANIS FARAH”
Dr. Anis Farah for Laurentian University Faculty Association
“HARLEY D’ENTREMONT”
Dr. Harley d’Entremont for Laurentian University of Sudbury
[NOTE: Articles 1.30, 7.1 and 7.2 in the above appendix have been changed to Articles 2.15,
10.10 and 10.15 respectively in the 2008-11
Collective Agreement.]
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 228

Collective Agreement 2008-11
APPENDIX C
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY
SPECIAL VOLUNTARY EARLY RETIREMENT PLAN
1. Laurentian University plans to re-introduce a Special
Voluntary Early Retirement Plan for full-time faculty
Members, hereafter called the Member, effective from July 1, 2008. The purpose of this program is to facilitate renewal of
faculty. Faculty renewal is expected to have a positive impact on the organization through the revitalization of academic
departments and by helping to reduce hiring problems anticipated in the future.
2. The Special Voluntary Early Retirement Plan will provide an early retirement incentive to help make early retirements
possible. These programs are separate from the Pension Plan, and are to be funded through savings in the operating
budget owing to replacement at lower salary levels.
3. The opportunity for this plan is provided by the fact that this program, to a large degree, would be self- financing and
that there will be no or minimum increase in cost to the University.
4. To be eligible for Special Voluntary Early Retirement, the Member must:
(a) be five (5) years or less from the attainment of her/his Normal Retirement Date, and
(b) have completed at least fifteen (15) years of full-time service at Laurentian University as of the proposed date of
commencement of
Special Voluntary Early Retirement.
5. On any July 1 (January 1), a Member who is eligible under the requirements described in the previous clause may
choose to take Special Voluntary Early
Retirement. In such a case the Member shall apply in writing to the Dean/University Librarian of her/his
Faculty/Library by no later than the previous October
1 (April 1).
6. A Member who does not fully meet the eligibility criteria may apply through the Dean/University
Librarian of her/his Faculty/Library for individual consideration. Each application will be assessed on its merits. If the
proposed early retirement is judged
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 229

Collective Agreement 2008-11 to be of benefit to both the Member and the
University, the early retirement incentive as set out in this plan will be made available. The University will consider
applications from individuals who are up to ten (10) years from attainment of their normal retirement date
7. The granting of a Member's application may, but will not normally be delayed by decision of the University.
Such a delay may occur once only and will be for a period of six (6) months to one (1) year.
8. A Member shall be notified by the Vice-President,
Academic by December 1 (June 1) in the year that the Member has applied for Special Voluntary Early
Retirement if the application has been granted for
Special Voluntary Early Retirement to commence the following July 1 (January 1) or is to be delayed for six
(6) months or one (1) year. The Member must confirm her/his decision to take Special Voluntary
Early Retirement by February 1 (August 1) immediately preceding the July 1 (January 1) when the Special Voluntary Early
Retirement period would commence. The Member's confirmation will render the decision final.
9. A Member eligible for Special Voluntary Early
Retirement may request, before October 1 (April 1), a statement of the early retirement incentive and benefit costs for the
following year. All Members applying for Special Voluntary Early Retirement will automatically receive such a statement.
The
Member will receive the statement no later than
November 1 (May 1). A Member eligible for early retirement shall be entitled to receive a one-time reimbursement of up to
four hundred dollars ($400) for the services of a financial consultant (receipts required).
10. A decision to opt for Special Voluntary Early
Retirement is final, and the Member may not return to full-time or part-time employment at Laurentian
University unless requested and agreed to by the
University.
11. The Special Voluntary Early Retirement Period for the individual Member will be in effect from the commencement
date of Special Voluntary Early
Retirement and will continue until the earlier of the
Member's normal retirement date or death or to a maximum of three (3) years.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 230

Collective Agreement 2008-11
12. During the initial year of Special Voluntary Early
Retirement, the Member shall receive an early retirement incentive of one and three quarter percent
(1.75%) of salary (last year of her/his full-time employment) times years or fractions thereof of full- time service at early
retirement to a maximum of fifty percent (50%) of the aforementioned salary. (Leave of absence without pay is not
included in the calculation of a Member's years of service. Years of service under Article 7.35 – Voluntary Reduced
Workload will be prorated according to the percent workload reduction). The Vice-President, Academic may, after
discussion with the Member concerned, increase the incentive percentage to address particular concerns, without
exceeding the fifty percent (50%) maximum. Any increase in the incentive percentage over the formula amount must be
communicated with explanation to the Union.
13. During the subsequent years of Special Voluntary
Early Retirement, the Member shall receive an early retirement incentive increased each year by the percentage increase
of the faculty scale.
14. While on Special Voluntary Early Retirement, the
Member may wish to continue to participate in the
Laurentian University Retirement Plan. In such case the University's share of contributions will be deducted from the early
retirement incentive. The contributions will be based on the salary of the last year of her/his full-time employment
escalated annually by the percentage increase of the faculty salary scale. Furthermore, the Member will be eligible for the
minimum guaranteed pension based upon the aforementioned escalated salary and years of Special Voluntary Early
Retirement of paid pension contributions. In this case the Member will be considered to be on leave with pay and will be
required to pay Canada Pension Plan (CPP) and
Employment Insurance (EI) contributions and will not be eligible to the roll-over provisions described in the next clause.
The aforementioned is subject to the current Revenue Canada Regulations.
15. If the Member chooses not to continue contributing to the Laurentian University Retirement Plan, then she/he could be
treated as though she/he had terminated her/his employment with Laurentian. In that case, the incentive payments could
be treated as a retiring allowance so they would be eligible for roll- over to an RRSP up to the legal limit. The allowable
roll-over amount may be spread over the years of the
Special Voluntary Early Retirement and the remaining incentive amount would be considered
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 231

Collective Agreement 2008-11 income for the sake of calculating the annual RRSP contribution limit. In this case there
would be no deductions for CPP and EI and the Employer's cost would be added to the early retirement incentive.
The Member could collect her/his pension in addition to the incentive if she/he so desired. If the Member is at least sixty
(60) years of age, she/he may be eligible for full or partial CPP benefits, provided she/he has contributed to the plan. For
more information, or to get application forms, call the
Income Security Programs Office, which is listed under Human Resources and Labour Canada of the
Government of Canada. The aforementioned is subject to the current Revenue Canada Regulations.
16. During the Voluntary Early Retirement period, the benefits will apply as follows:
(a) Members considered to be on leave with pay will retain participation in the Group Life
Insurance, Dependant Group Life, Accidental
Death and Dismemberment, Hospital Care,
Extended Medical (including ManuAssist), the dental plan and the Retirees Health Benefit
Plan. The Long-Term Disability plan cannot be continued. Members may also be exempt from the hospital care and
extended medical coverage if they have similar coverage through the group plan of a spouse.
(b) Members no longer considered employees may choose to retain participation in Group
Life Insurance, Dependant Group Life,
Accidental Death and Dismemberment,
Hospital Care, Extended Medical (including
ManuAssist) and the Dental Plan. The Long-
Term Disability plan cannot be continued.
Continued participation in these plans will entitle the Member to receive a subsidy under the Retirees Health Benefit Plan
at normal retirement age.
The cost sharing of the premiums for these benefits will be split according to the cost sharing arrangement in this
Collective Agreement. The life
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 232

Collective Agreement 2008-11 insurance coverage will be based on three (3) times the early retirement incentive up to the
maximum of the benefit plan. If improvements in benefits are provided in subsequent Collective Agreements these
improvements shall be extended to the retirees on
Special Voluntary Early Retirement. Members who go on Special Voluntary Early Retirement will not be eligible for sick
leave. The Employer's cost of those benefit plans in which the Member does not retain participation will be added to the
early retirement incentive. The Employer's cost will be based on the premium charged by the carrier and will not include
the Provincial Sales Tax.
17. Should the Member die during the Special Voluntary
Early Retirement Period, the payment will cease at the end of the month the death occurred. Benefits and Pension
contributions will also terminate as of the end of the month of the Member's death.
18. A Member taking Special Voluntary Early Retirement would enjoy all retiree privileges as well as tuition fee waiver.
19. Admission to the Special Voluntary Early Retirement
Plan will be available under this plan for a four (4) year period i.e. from July 1, 2008 to June 30, 2012. If the Laurentian
University Retirement Plan is amended to provide for additional early retirement provisions to Laurentian University faculty
Employees, the Special Voluntary Retirement Plan will be reviewed at that time.
20. The provisions of this Special Voluntary Early
Retirement Plan shall apply as of the date of approval by the Employer. These provisions may be amended and/or
extended for a further period with the agreement of both the Employer and the Union.
Such decision will be made prior to June 30, 2011.
Early-retired Members at the time of amendment or termination of these provisions will not be disadvantaged by such
amendment or termination.
21. The Parties agree that any early retirement or severance procedures that are not provided for in this Collective
Agreement will be subject to prior approval by the Parties before they are offered to the faculty. The Parties further agree
that individual early retirement or severance agreements that are not provided in this Collective Agreement shall be
subject to the Union’s approval by way of Memorandum of
Agreement.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 233

Collective Agreement 2008-11
DATED AT Sudbury, Ontario, this 22nd day of
September, 2008.
“DAVID LEADBEATER”
Dr. David Leadbeater for Laurentian University Faculty Association
“HARLEY D’ENTREMONT”
Dr. Harley d’Entremont for Laurentian University of Sudbury
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 234

Collective Agreement 2008-11
APPENDIX D
AGREEMENT BETWEEN
THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF LAURENTIAN
UNIVERSITY
AND
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY ASSOCIATION
PHASED RETIREMENT
1. A program for phased retirement over three (3) years was instituted on July 1, 2006 and continues to be in effect.
Members will give notice of their intention to participate in the phased retirement program one (1) year in advance of their
proposed commencement date for phased retirement (which shall be a July 1) to facilitate planning within
Departments/Schools. Such notice of intent will be irrevocable. Phased retirement will be available to full-time Members
(full-time is defined as those with greater than seventy-five percent (75%) appointment), who will first become eligible for
phased retirement three (3) years before they are eligible for an unreduced pension (i.e. at age fifty- nine (59)) and will
remain eligible until age sixty- three (63). A Member in the phased retirement program (the participant) will be expected to
continue the full range of her/his normal pre- program duties as agreed with the Chair and proportionate to her/his
percentage appointment over the three (3) year period. Unless the applicant and the Dean/University Librarian agree
otherwise, the cumulative appointment over the three (3) year phased retirement period will be at least one hundred and
fifty percent (150%) but not more than one hundred and seventy-five percent (175%) of a full-time appointment and will be
subject to a minimum percentage appointment in any one year equal to twenty-five percent (25%) of full-time
appointment. For phased retirement, the cumulative appointment over the two (2) year phased retirement period will be at
least one hundred percent (100%) but not more than one hundred and twenty-five percent (125%) of a full- time
appointment and will be subject to a minimum percentage appointment in any one year equal to twenty-five percent (25%)
of full-time appointment.
2. The participant’s salary during the three (3) year phased retirement period will be prorated on the basis of the part-time
appointment of the participant in each year.
3. The participant will earn pension benefits based on a full-time appointment and assuming a salary in each year of
phased retirement program equal to
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 235

Collective Agreement 2008-11 participant’s one hundred percent (100%) nominal salary. The participant’s contributions to
the pension plan will be based on her/his nominal salary in each year of the phased retirement.
4. Group benefit coverage will continue as though the participant continued to be employed on a full-time appointment
throughout the phased retirement program, except as set out in this clause with respect to life insurance, physical and
mental leave and Long-Term Disability.
Life insurance coverage (prior to Normal Retirement
Date) shall be based upon the participant’s pre- program salary.
The participant shall be covered by the policy on
Physical and Mental Illness leave, and shall be compensated on the basis of her/his actual salary received during the
period of phased retirement.
Long-Term Disability benefits will be payable only up to the participant’s irrevocable retirement date, or if earlier, the
Normal Retirement Date, with such benefits being calculated according to the actual salary during the phased retirement,
subject to plan requirements. A participant who is eligible and qualifies for Long-Term Disability benefits during the
phased retirement program may opt out of the phased retirement program and retire instead of receiving Long-Term
Disability benefits.
5. The participant will also be eligible to receive a
Retiring Allowance equal to seventy-five percent
(75%) of the one hundred percent (100%) nominal salary in effect immediately prior to the commencement of phased
retirement, less deductions required by law (the “Retiring
Allowance”). For a two (2) year phased retirement, the Retiring Allowance shall be fifty percent (50%).
The Retiring Allowance will be payable in three (3) equal annual instalments over the phased three (3) year retirement
period and two (2) equal annual instalments over the phased two (2) year retirement period, subject to confirmation by the
Canada
Revenue Agency satisfactory to the Employer that such payments will qualify for retiring allowance treatment. Should an
arrangement in this form not be accepted by Canada Revenue Agency as a
Retiring Allowance, the Employer agrees to work with the Union to make such amendments as are required to satisfy the
Canada Revenue Agency.
Otherwise, the Retiring Allowance will be paid in the form of a single lump sum payment at the end of the phased
retirement. In the event that a participant dies prior to receiving her/his full entitlement under this section, the balance of
the
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 236

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Retiring Allowance shall be paid to the participant’s estate.
A participant who has opted out of the phased retirement program under clause 4 above shall receive a prorated share of
her/his Retiring
Allowance.
6. Participants in the phased retirement program will be entitled to full professional development expenditure
reimbursement and will be entitled to participate in all programs that are available to
Members.
DATED AT Sudbury, Ontario, this 21th day of
September 2008.
“DAVID LEADBEATER”
Dr. David Leadbeater for Laurentian University Faculty Association
“HARLEY D’ENTREMONT”
Dr. Harley d’Entremont for Laurentian University of Sudbury
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 237

Collective Agreement 2008-11
APPENDIX E
LETTER OF UNDERSTANDING
BETWEEN:
THE LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY
ASSOCIATION
AND
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY OF SUDBURY
RE: JOINT COMMITTEE ON THE PENSION PLAN
THE PARTIES AGREE TO establish a joint committee of four (4) members, two (2) appointed by the Union and two (2)
appointed by the
Employer, for the purposes of:
1. Discussing and better understanding the pension plan.
2. Determining if there are opportunities for improving the pension plan, specifically focusing on the following issues:
(a) Number of years used for calculating “Best
Average Earnings”
(b) Indexed inflation protection
(c) Contribution levels
(d) Pension formula
3. Recommending to the Parties a plan for improving the pension plan.
4. If the Parties agree that there is a need for extraordinary actuarial services, such costs shall be shared equally by the
Parties.
The Committee shall meet by January 31, 2009 and report by January 31, 2010.
DATED AT Sudbury, Ontario, this 24th day of
September 2008.
“DAVID LEADBEATER”
Dr. David Leadbeater for Laurentian University Faculty Association
“HARLEY D’ENTREMONT”
Dr. Harley d’Entremont for Laurentian University of Sudbury
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 238

Collective Agreement 2008-11
APPENDIX F
AMENDED
LETTER OF UNDERSTANDING
BETWEEN:
THE LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY
ASSOCIATION
AND
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY OF SUDBURY
RE: PENSION AND BENEFITS
THE PARTIES HEREBY AGREE THAT the following changes will be made to the benefit coverage effective November 1,
2002.
Life Insurance: 3 x annual salary to a maximum of
$300,000.
Vision Care Expenses: maximum of $300 every two years.
Dental Plan: payment shall be made in accordance with the current rate schedule as established by the
Ontario Dental Association.
THE PARTIES FURTHER AGREE to implement a supplementary pension plan for all Members who retire after July 1,
2002 as proposed by the plan’s actuary in his letter dated February 17, 2000.
DATED AT Sudbury, Ontario, this 11th day of
September 2002.
“DR. ANIS FARAH” for
Laurentian University
Faculty Association
“DR. HERMANN FALTER” for
Laurentian University of Sudbury
AMENDED LETTER OF UNDERSTANDING
DATED AT
Sudbury, Ontario, this 4th day of February 2009.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 239

Collective Agreement 2008-11
“DAVID LEADBEATER”
Dr. David Leadbeater for Laurentian University Faculty Association
“HARLEY D’ENTREMONT”
Dr. Harley d’Entremont for Laurentian University of Sudbury
[NOTE: The above crossed out language has since been renegotiated and the new language reflecting any changes now
appears in Article 8.45 –
Benefits.]
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 240

Collective Agreement 2008-11
APPENDIX G
LETTER OF UNDERSTANDING
BETWEEN:
THE LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY
ASSOCIATION
AND
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY OF SUDBURY
RE: BENEFIT PROGRAM FOR RETIRED
EMPLOYEES
THE PARTIES HEREBY AGREE TO form a committee consisting of two (2) union representatives and two (2) Employer
representatives to review the benefit plans that are available to retirees that are offered by various insurance or
associations to allow for a seamless transition.
The committee will conclude its findings and produce a report to the Union and the Employer by
December 31, 2009.
The Committee will be provided with the latest actuarial valuation of the Retiree Health Benefit
Plan (RHBP).
DATED AT Sudbury, Ontario, this 24th day of
September 2008.
“DAVID LEADBEATER”
Dr. David Leadbeater for Laurentian University Faculty Association
“HARLEY D’ENTREMONT”
Dr. Harley d’Entremont for Laurentian University of Sudbury
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 241

Collective Agreement 2008-11
APPENDIX H
LETTER OF UNDERSTANDING
BETWEEN:
THE LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY
ASSOCIATION
AND
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY OF SUDBURY
RE: ONGOING REVIEW OF BENEFITS PROGRAM
FOR RETIRED EMPLOYEES
THE PARTIES AGREE THAT the Benefits
Committee should continue to review the benefits for retired employees within the parameters of the original mandate with
the view of:
(a) finding options to improve the existing benefits plan; and
(b) investigating to what extent benefits of the existing plan can be used to offset costs of improving a spousal benefits
plan with a different Employer; the committee will inform the Parties and the retired members of the outcome of the
investigation as soon as it has been completed.
DATED AT Sudbury, Ontario, this 23rd day of
September 1999.
“DR. ANIS FARAH” for
Laurentian University
Faculty Association
“DR. HERMANN FALTER” for
Laurentian University of Sudbury
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 242

Collective Agreement 2008-11
APPENDIX I
LETTER OF UNDERSTANDING
BETWEEN:
THE LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY
ASSOCIATION
AND
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY OF SUDBURY
RE: JOINT COMMITTEE TO REVIEW THE STUDENT
COURSE EVALUATION
THE PARTIES HEREBY AGREE THAT:
1. The Union and the Employer will establish a joint committee to review the student course evaluation form and process
at Laurentian. In developing its recommendations, the Committee will consider concerns about the existing course
evaluation questionnaire and how it is administered, different approaches to course evaluation, and the research literature
on course evaluation. The Committee will give special attention to the evaluation of co-taught courses.
2. The Committee will be constituted by January 30,
2009 and will be composed of three (3) members appointed by the Employer, three (3) members appointed by the Union,
and a seventh member mutually agreed by both Parties to act as chair.
The Committee will produce a report with recommendations to the Parties by January 2010.
3. The Committee will make reasonable efforts to consult widely with students and faculty.
DATED AT Sudbury, Ontario, this 24th day of
September 2008.
“DAVID LEADBEATER”
Dr. David Leadbeater for Laurentian University Faculty Association
“HARLEY D’ENTREMONT”
Dr. Harley d’Entremont for Laurentian University of Sudbury
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 243

Collective Agreement 2008-11
APPENDIX J
LETTER OF UNDERSTANDING
BETWEEN:
THE LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY
ASSOCIATION
AND
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY OF SUDBURY
RE: JOINT COMMITTEE TO STUDY APPREHENSION
OF BIAS
THE PARTIES AGREE TO establish a committee of two (2) representatives chosen by the Union and two (2)
representatives chosen by the Employer to provide guidelines for the applications of the concept of “apprehension of bias”
in university decision-making and in the context of committees operating under this Collective Agreement. The committee
shall be establish by January 15, 2009 and make its report to the Parties by March 15,
2009.
DATED AT Sudbury, Ontario, this 15th day of
September 2008.
“DAVID LEADBEATER”
Dr. David Leadbeater for Laurentian University Faculty Association
“HARLEY D’ENTREMONT”
Dr. Harley d’Entremont for Laurentian University of Sudbury
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 244

Collective Agreement 2008-11
APPENDIX K
LETTER OF UNDERSTANDING
BETWEEN:
THE LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY
ASSOCIATION
AND
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY OF SUDBURY
RE: JOINT COMMITTEE ON COORDINATORS
THE PARTIES AGREE TO establish a committee of six (6) members, three (3) appointed by the
Union and three (3) by the Employer, for the purpose of:
1. Studying the role of coordinators at Laurentian
University, including for graduate, undergraduate,
French and English programs as well as in the
Library. The committee shall consider the role of coordinators in relation to the role of
Chairs/Directors and to Members in fulfilling their administrative service responsibilities.
2. Recommending to the Parties a definition for the coordinator role that facilitates program development and the cohesive
functioning of the
Departments/Schools.
3. Recommending to the Parties a fair and equitable system of teaching/professional library workload reduction for
coordinators.
The Committee will meet by January 15, 2009 and report by October 15, 2009.
DATED AT Sudbury, Ontario, this 14th day of
September 2008.
“DAVID LEADBEATER”
Dr. David Leadbeater for Laurentian University Faculty Association
“HARLEY D’ENTREMONT”
Dr. Harley d’Entremont for Laurentian University of Sudbury
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 245

Collective Agreement 2008-11
APPENDIX L
LETTER OF UNDERSTANDING
BETWEEN:
THE LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY
ASSOCIATION
AND
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY OF SUDBURY
RE: ASBESTOS
THE PARTIES HEREBY AGREE THAT the
Employer shall post on the Occupational Health and
Safety website a recent report on buildings containing asbestos. There will be a link to the
Material Safety Data Sheets for asbestos. The
Joint Health and Safety Committee shall organize information sessions on the report and health consequences of
asbestos.
DATED AT Sudbury, Ontario, this 21st day of
September 2008.
“DAVID LEADBEATER”
Dr. David Leadbeater for Laurentian University Faculty Association
“HARLEY D’ENTREMONT”
Dr. Harley d’Entremont for Laurentian University of Sudbury
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 246

Collective Agreement 2008-11
APPENDIX M
LETTER OF UNDERSTANDING
BETWEEN:
THE LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY
ASSOCIATION
AND
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY OF SUDBURY
RE: BUILDING AND PLANNING COMMITTEE
THE PARTIES HEREBY AGREE THAT the
University negotiating committee will recommend to the Board of Governors that two (2) LUFA representatives be added
to the Building and
Planning Committee.
DATED AT Sudbury, Ontario, this 14th day of
September 2008.
“DAVID LEADBEATER”
Dr. David Leadbeater for Laurentian University Faculty Association
“HARLEY D’ENTREMONT”
Dr. Harley d’Entremont for Laurentian University of Sudbury
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 247

Collective Agreement 2008-11
APPENDIX N
LETTER OF UNDERSTANDING
BETWEEN:
THE LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY
ASSOCIATION
AND
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY OF SUDBURY
RE: UNIVERSAL BUS PASS
THE PARTIES HEREBY AGREE THAT a representative of the Union and a representative of the Employer shall meet
with a representative of the
City of Greater Sudbury, Transit Operation to explore the possibility of negotiating a low-cost
Universal Bus Pass for all full-time and Sessional
Members.
DATED AT Sudbury, Ontario, this 14th day of
September 2008.
“DAVID LEADBEATER”
Dr. David Leadbeater for Laurentian University Faculty Association
“HARLEY D’ENTREMONT”
Dr. Harley d’Entremont for Laurentian University of Sudbury
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 248

Collective Agreement 2008-11
APPENDIX O
STANDARD LETTER OF APPOINTMENT
(The actual letter may contain additional information)
DAY/MONTH/YEAR
Dr. XXX
ADDRESS
Dear Dr. XXX
On the recommendation of the Dean of (FACULTY) /
University Librarian and the (DEPARTMENT/SCHOOL) we are pleased to offer you an appointment at Laurentian
University.
The terms of the offer are shown on the enclosed form. If they are acceptable, please sign and return one copy.
A copy of the Collective Agreement with the Laurentian
University Faculty Association can be found at the following website: http://www.lufapul.ca/ColAgree.htm
This offer is conditional on your being legally entitled to work in
Canada. Please call me if you have any questions concerning your entitlement to work in Canada.
Please note in the enclosed offer the requirement that you furnish proof of educational credentials. All appointments at
Laurentian University are conditional upon this requirement being fulfilled. The requirement can be met by you bringing to
the Vice-President, Academic the original degree or diploma for photocopying, or by the educational institution submitting
directly to my office either a transcript or a certification that the stated degree or diploma has been granted.
This offer remains open until (DATE). If you require more time to consider this offer, please contact me as soon as
possible and in any event before the offer expires.
If you have any questions, please do not hesitate to contact me.
Sincerely,
Vice-President, Academic
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 249

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Enclosures
OFFER OF EMPLOYMENT TO
(Subject to changes in the new Collective Agreement)
DR. XXXX
DATE
1. DEPARTMENT/SCHOOL. This appointment is in the
Department/School of XXX.
2. TYPE OF APPOINTMENT. This is a XXX appointment.
3. EFFECTIVE DATE. The effective date of this appointment will be Day/Month/Year. End date if applicable.
4. RANK. This appointment will be at the rank of XXX based on your qualifications and years of experience according to
Article 5.10 – Academic Qualifications
Guidelines.
5. SALARY. Your starting salary will be XXX per annum based on XXX years of university experience and
XXX years of other experience relevant to your discipline as well as other factors affecting faculty recruitment in your field.
Your salary, benefits and other provisions will be adjusted according to any new Collective Agreement between the
Employer and the Union.
6. LENGTH OF PROBATIONARY PERIOD. The normal probationary period is five (5) academic years in length.
(Because of your previous experience at
Laurentian, the normal probationary period may be reduced by xxx years. Please confirm in writing should you wish to
accept that reduction.) You will be considered for tenure in the fifth (5th) academic year
(academic year 20x/20xx) following the effective date of this appointment. If tenure is not granted, your appointment will
terminate at the end of that academic year (XXX). If tenure is granted, it will be effective on the first (1st) day of the
following academic year (day/month/year).
You may apply and be considered for tenure in the fourth academic year (academic year XXX) following the effective date
of this appointment per paragraph
5.60.3 (a) of Article 5.60 – Tenure Evaluation
Procedures.
7. RENEWAL. As per clause 5.20.22 of Article 5.20 –
Appointment and Renewal, in September 20XX, you
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 250

Collective Agreement 2008-11 will undergo an initial contract renewal which if successful will be followed by a further two
(2) year probationary appointment.
8. SABBATICAL LEAVE. As per Article 7.25 –
Sabbatical Leaves, you will be eligible to apply for a sabbatical leave of one (1) year to commence after six (6) academic
years of service, less XXX years of credit that you have been granted, in a full-time academic capacity for service.
9. RESPONSIBILITIES. Your responsibilities are outlined in Article 5.15 – Rights, Responsibilities and
Duties of Academics and will include teaching and academic guidance of students, scholarly activity, and service to the
University.
10. BILINGUAL REQUIREMENT. As per Article 3.30 –
Bilingualism, you are required to become passively bilingual as a condition of tenure. If needed, the
Employer will provide language training and in any year you take such training you will be relieved of the requirement to
participate in university governance beyond the Department/School level.
11. RELEASE TIME. Your normal teaching load will be reduced by one (1) course (six (6) credit equivalent) during your
first (1st) year (if applicable).
12. PHYSICAL AND MENTAL ILLNESS. You are eligible for sick leave up to a maximum of six (6) months at full salary
from the date of disability due to accident or illness, for each separate disability cause as per
Article 7.55 – Physical and Mental Illness.
13. LONG-TERM DISABILITY. You will be required to join the Long-Term Disability insurance plan which provides
benefits after six (6) months of uninterrupted total disability.
14. LIFE INSURANCE INCLUDING ACCIDENTAL
DEATH AND DISMEMBERMENT. You will be required to join the life insurance plan. You may supplement your coverage
by purchasing optional life insurance, the premiums for which are fully paid by the Employee.
15. EXTENDED MEDICAL AND DENTAL CARE
PLANS. You will be eligible to join the Extended
Medical and Dental Care Plans.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 251

Collective Agreement 2008-11
16. PENSION. You are required to join the pension plan effective your date of appointment.
17. VACATION. You will be entitled to an annual vacation of twenty-five (25) days during your first (1st) year and
thereafter as per Article 7.15 – Vacation.
18. TUITION FEE EXEMPTION. This policy covers a person employed full-time by the University from the first (1st) day of
her/his appointment and her/his spouse and dependent children from the same date.
19. START-UP GRANT. You will be provided with a start- up research/creative activity grant of XXX. These funds must be
used and expended in accordance with the University policy on start-up grants.
20. PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
EXPENDITURES. You will be provided XXX for the first (1st) year for your professional development expenditures and
thereafter as per Article 6.45 –
Professional Development Expenditures.
21. MOVING EXPENSES. The Employer will reimburse claims at the rate of one-hundred percent (100%) to a maximum
of five-thousand dollars ($5,000). Moving expenses paid to a new Member constitute a loan made by the University. This
loan will be retired when the Member has completed three (3) years of continuous service to the University, each year
being equivalent to one-third (1/3) of the reimbursement of the loan.
22. LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY
ASSOCIATION. This appointment is subject to a
Collective Agreement between the Board of
Governors of Laurentian University and the
Laurentian University Faculty Association. The current Collective Agreement is for a term ending
2011. Monthly dues to the Union will be deducted from your salary.
23. PROOF OF STATED EDUCATIONAL
QUALIFICATIONS. It is University policy that all persons appointed to positions of both an academic and non-academic
nature, part-time or full-time, furnish proof of their stated educational credentials to the Vice-President, Academic. This
offer of employment is conditional upon this requirement being fulfilled by you in respect of your latest degree.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 252

Collective Agreement 2008-11
24. OTHER TERMS. a) Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, this probationary appointment will terminate
automatically if you are not granted a tenured appointment. Laurentian
University makes no promises concerning the possibility of further or other appointments, including a tenured
appointment.
25. CONSISTENCY WITH COLLECTIVE AGREEMENT.
This offer is made pursuant to the Collective
Agreement and the Collective Agreement shall prevail in case of any inconsistency between the terms of this Offer and
the terms of the Collective
Agreement.
Vice-President, Academic Date
I hereby accept the conditions of employment set out in this document.
NAME Date
/nbm c.c.: Dean
Financial Services
Human Resources
Institutional Research
Laurentian University Faculty Association
Payroll and Benefits Centre
DATED AT Sudbury, Ontario, this 21st day of
September 2008.
“DAVID LEADBEATER”
Dr. David Leadbeater for Laurentian University Faculty Association
“HARLEY D’ENTREMONT”
Dr. Harley d’Entremont for Laurentian University of Sudbury
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 253

Collective Agreement 2008-11
APPENDIX P
MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT
BETWEEN:
THE LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY
ASSOCIATION
AND
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY OF SUDBURY
RE: COLLECTIVE AGREEMENT EDITORIAL
COMMITTEE
THE PARTIES HEREBY AGREE TO form a
Collective Agreement Editorial Committee headed by the two (2) chief negotiators or their designates with responsibility to
incorporate all new clauses upon which the Parties have agreed, verify the translation of all new material, delete
inoperative appendices and provide a comprehensive index with the new 2008-11 Collective Agreement.
DATED AT Sudbury, Ontario, this 24th day of
September 2008.
“DAVID LEADBEATER”
Dr. David Leadbeater for Laurentian University Faculty Association
“HARLEY D’ENTREMONT”
Dr. Harley d’Entremont for Laurentian University of Sudbury
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english Page 254

CCOOLLLLEECCTTIIVVEE
AAGGRREEEEMMEENNTT
BETWEEN
THE LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY
FACULTY ASSOCIATION
AND
THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 1

Collective Agreement 2008-11
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
Article 1.10 – Title 1
Article 1.15 – Official Languages 1
Article 1.20 – Purpose of the Collective Agreement 1
Article 1.25 – Objects and Purposes of the University 1
Article 1.30 – Definitions 2
Article 1.35 – Copies 5
RELATIONS BETWEEN THE UNION AND THE
EMPLOYER
Article 2.10 – Recognition of the Employer 6
Article 2.15 – Recognition of the Bargaining Unit 6
Article 2.20 – Employment of Non-Members 6
Article 2.25 – Senior Academic Administrators 7
Article 2.30 – Existing Practices 9
Article 2.35 – Modifications to the Legal Status of the 9
University
Article 2.40 – Rights And Privileges of the Union 9
Article 2.45 – Dues Check Off 11
Article 2.50 – Information 12
Article 2.55 – Correspondence 16
Article 2.60 – Joint Consultative Committee for the 17
Administration of the Collective
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 2

Collective Agreement 2008-11
WORKING CONDITIONS
Article 3.10 – Academic Freedom 19
Article 3.15 – No Discrimination, Harassment or 19
Bullying
Article 3.20 – Working Environment 21
Article 3.25 – Health, Safety and Security 23
Article 3.30 – Bilingualism 23
Article 3.35 – Conflict of Interest 25
SESSIONAL MEMBERS
Article 4.10 – Appointment Provisions for Sessional 27
Members
Article 4.15 – Appointment and Renewal for 27
Sessional Members
Article 4.20 – Permanent Appointments for Sessional 32
Members
Article 4.25 – Workload Provisions for Sessional 34
Members
Article 4.30 – Teaching Rights and Responsibilities 36 for Sessional Members
Article 4.35 – Annual Report for Sessional Members 37
Article 4.40 – Withdrawal of Seniority for Sessional 37
Members
Article 4.45 – Physical and Mental Illness for 39
Sessional Members
Article 4.50 – Family Responsibility for Sessional 39
Members
Article 4.55 – Rates of Pay for Sessional Members 39
Article 4.60 – Physical Education Facilities for 42
Sessional Members
Article 4.65 – Exemption from Tuition Fees for 43
Sessional Members
Article 4.70 – Professional Development 43
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 3

Collective Agreement 2008-11
ACADEMIC CAREER
Article 5.10 – Academic Qualifications Guidelines 44
Article 5.15 – Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of 50
Academics
Article 5.20 – Appointment and Renewal 57
Article 5.25 – Employment Equity 67
Article 5.30 – Aboriginal Equity Initiative 69
Article 5.35 – Newly Hired Members 69
Article 5.40 – Academic Workload 69
Article 5.45 – Annual Report for Members 78
Article 5.50 – Assessment of a Member's 79
Performance
Article 5.55 – Faculty/Francophone Faculty/Library 86
Personnel Committee
Article 5.60 – Tenure Evaluation Procedures 92
Article 5.65 – Promotion Procedures 99
Article 5.70 – Personnel Files 102
Article 5.75 – Disciplinary Measures 105
Article 5.80 – Dismissal Procedures 106
Article 5.85 – Resignation 108
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 4

Collective Agreement 2008-11
RESEARCH, CREATIVITY AND PROFESSIONAL
DEVELOPMENT
Article 6.10 – Research and Creativity 111
Article 6.15 – Research, Creativity and Development 111
Office
Article 6.20 – Research and Development Support 112
Article 6.25 – Laurentian University Research Fund 112
(LURF)
Article 6.30 – Patents 114
Article 6.35 – Copyright 116
Article 6.40 – Committee on Patents and Copyright 119
Article 6.45 – Professional Development 121
Expenditures
LEAVES
Article 7.10 – Recognized and Other Holidays 123
Article 7.15 – Vacation 123
Article 7.20 – Absence General 124
Article 7.25 – Sabbatical Leaves 126
Article 7.30 – Study Leaves 136
Article 7.35 – Voluntary Reduced Workload 139
Article 7.40 – Leaves of Absence Without Pay 142
Article 7.45 – Court Leaves 142
Article 7.50 – Political Leaves 143
Article 7.55 – Physical and Mental Illness 144
Article 7.60 – Pregnancy, Parental and Adoption 149
Leaves
Article 7.65 – Special Leaves 153
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 5

Collective Agreement 2008-11
SALARY AND BENEFITS
Article 8.10 – Salary Structure 155
Article 8.15 – Progress Through the Ranks 158
Increments
Article 8.20 – Procedures for the Award/Denial of a 158
Progress Through the Ranks Increment
Article 8.25 – Merit Increments 161
Article 8.30 – Additional Qualifications Increments 162
Article 8.35 – Overloads 162
Article 8.40 – Distance Education Courses 163
Article 8.45 – Benefits 165
Article 8.50 – Tuition Fee Exemption and Spousal 168
Library Card
Article 8.55 – Moving Expenses 169
Article 8.60 – Physical Education Facilities 170
Article 8.65 – Public Liability Insurance 170
Article 8.70 – Parking 171
Article 8.75 – Reimbursement of Expenses 171
Article 8.80 – Policy and Procedures in the Event of 171
Death
Article 8.85 – Salary to Beneficiary in the Event of 174
Death of Faculty Member
CHAIRS AND DIRECTORS
Article 9.10 – Duties of Chairs/Directors 175
Article 9.15 – Selection of Chairs/Directors 177
Article 9.20 – Term of Office of Chairs/Directors 180
Article 9.25 – Teaching Load Reductions and 180
Stipends for Chairs/Directors
Article 9.30 – Removal from Office of 182
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 6

Collective Agreement 2008-11
REDUNDANCY AND FINANCIAL EXIGENCY
Article 10.10 – Redundancy 184
Article 10.15 – Financial Exigency 191
GRIEVANCE AND ARBITRATION
Article 11.10 – Grievance Procedure 198
Article 11.15 – Arbitration Procedure 201
STRIKES AND LOCKOUTS
Article 12.10 – Strikes and Lockouts 204
VALIDITY, DURATION AND CONTINUANCE OF
THE COLLECTIVE AGREEMENT
Article 13.10 – Validity of the Collective Agreement 205
Article 13.15 – Duration and Continuance of the 205
Collective Agreement
APPENDICES
A-1 OLRB Designation of the Bargaining Unit 207
A-2 1979 OLRB Designation of the Bargaining 209
Unit (For Reference Only)
A-3 1979 OLRB Decision (For Reference Only) 210
A-4 (1) 1994 OLRB Designation of Sessional 215
Bargaining Unit (For Reference Only)
A-4 (2) Memorandum of Agreement Terms and 217
Conditions of Employment for Sessional
(Part-Time) Bargaining Unit (For Reference
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 7

Collective Agreement 2008-11
B Faculty Members Employed by Laurentian 219
University on Campuses Outside of
Sudbury
C Special Voluntary Early Retirement Plan 221
D Phased Retirement 227
E Joint Committee on the Pension Plan 230
F Pension and Benefits 231
G Benefit Program for Retired Employees 233
H Ongoing Review of Benefits Program for 234
Retired Employees
I Joint Committee to Review the Student 235
Course Evaluation
J Joint Committee to Study Apprehension of 236
Bias
K Joint Committee on Coordinators 237
L Asbestos 238
M Building and Planning Committee 239
N Universal Bus Pass 240
O Standard Letter of Appointment 241
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 8

Collective Agreement 2008-11
INTRODUCTION
ARTICLE 1.10 – TITLE
1.10.1 The official title of this Collective Agreement shall be
"The Collective Agreement between the Laurentian
University Faculty Association and the Board of
Governors of Laurentian University". Hereinafter, this title shall be referred to as the Collective Agreement.
ARTICLE 1.15 – OFFICIAL LANGUAGES
1.15.1 Both the English and French versions of the
Collective Agreement shall be official and definitive versions. Both Parties may use either the English or the French
version in any proceedings arising out of the Collective Agreement, and shall apply the version of the Collective
Agreement in which formal grievance/arbitration proceedings were initiated.
1.15.2 The Parties agree to cooperate to have the
Collective Agreement translated within ninety (90) days from the version negotiated at the table into the other official
language of Canada. The Parties will share equally in the cost of the translation.
ARTICLE 1.20 – PURPOSE OF THE COLLECTIVE
AGREEMENT
1.20.1 It is the purpose of this Collective Agreement:
(a) To set forth terms and conditions relating to employment, remuneration and benefits.
(b) To maintain a harmonious relationship between the Union and the Employer by providing amicable means for settling
differences which may arise between them from time to time.
(c) To encourage the efficient and responsible conduct of the life and work of the University.
(d) To foster a working environment which motivates Members to achieve the objects and purposes of the University.
ARTICLE 1.25 – OBJECTS AND PURPOSES OF THE
UNIVERSITY
1.25.1 The objects and purposes of the University, as set out in the Act, are:
(a) The advancement of learning and the dissemination of knowledge; and
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 9

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(b) The intellectual, social, moral and physical development of its members and the betterment of society.
1.25.2 The Parties agree to cooperate in the pursuit of these objects and purposes.
ARTICLE 1.30 – DEFINITIONS
1.30.1 For the purpose of this Collective Agreement the following words shall bear the definition indicated herein except
as otherwise provided in this Collective
Agreement:
(a) Laurentian University of Sudbury Act shall mean the Laurentian University of Sudbury
Act, being Chapter 151 of the Statutes of
Ontario for the year 1960 as amended by
Chapter 154, 1961-62.
(b) University shall mean Laurentian University of
Sudbury.
(c) Employer or Board shall mean the Board of
Governors of Laurentian University, or its designate, as provided for in the Laurentian
University of Sudbury Act.
(d) Union or LUFA shall mean the Laurentian
University Faculty Association, certified to be the exclusive Bargaining Agent for the full- time and Sessional faculty of the
University pursuant to the various relevant decisions of the Ontario Labour Relations Board.
(e) Parties shall mean the Board of Governors of
Laurentian University of Sudbury and the
Laurentian University Faculty Association.
(f) Senate shall mean the Senate of Laurentian
University of Sudbury as constituted in the
Laurentian University of Sudbury Act.
(g) President shall mean the President of
Laurentian University of Sudbury or the
President's designate.
(h) Vice-President, Academic shall mean the
Vice-President, Academic (Anglophone
Affairs) or Vice-President, Academic
(Francophone Affairs) as appropriate or their respective designates.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 10

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(i) Dean shall mean the Dean of a Faculty duly appointed or the Dean's designate.
(j) University Librarian shall mean the officer in charge of the University Library and Archives.
(k) Faculty shall mean any body identified as such by the Senate of Laurentian University of Sudbury, and with the
approval of the
Employer in accordance with the Laurentian
University of Sudbury Act.
(l) Chair/Director shall mean the Chair/Director of any teaching department / professional school / library department.
(m) Member or Employee shall mean a Member of the Bargaining Unit for whom the Union is certified as the exclusive
bargaining agent except where the context requires otherwise.
(n) Full-time faculty Members shall mean academic Employees appointed through tenured, probationary, or limited-term
appointments to perform duties of (a)
Teaching, including supervision / Professional
Librarianship / Archives Management, (b)
Scholarly Activity, and (c) University
Governance and Administrative Duties consistent with Article 5.15 – Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of Academics.
(o) Unless specified in relevant Articles within the
Collective Agreement, the terms Professional
Librarians and professional librarianship shall mean Professional Librarians and Archivists, and professional librarianship
and archival management, respectively.
(p) Sessional Member shall mean a Member hitherto a Member of the Bargaining Unit designated by the March 28, 1994
Ontario
Labour Relations Board Certificate and now a
Member of this Merged Bargaining Unit.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 11

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(q) Adjunct faculty members shall mean those persons outside the university whose scholarly or professional
accomplishments merit association with the university. Adjunct faculty members are appointed for a defined period, with
defined privileges and voluntary responsibilities in scholarly activity. Adjunct appointments do not have ranks or carry the
right to vote in Department/School decision- making.
(r) Academic Year shall mean the twelve (12) month period commencing July 1 and ending
June 30 of any given year and includes the
Fall, Winter, and Spring Terms as per the
University Calendar, even where the Spring
Term extends beyond June 30.
(s) Session shall mean either or both Terms of the Winter Session (from September to
December or from January to April) or the
Spring Session (from April to July) as per the
Laurentian University Calendar.
(t) Course credits shall mean the number of credits assigned to a course by the University
Senate and as indicated in the Laurentian
University Calendar.
(u) Course credits that contribute toward
Sessional Seniority shall mean credits arising from courses for which the Sessional
Lecturer’s name appears on the Laurentian
University course masters, grade reports, teaching evaluations, or letters of appointment and excludes courses offered by
the Centre for Continuing Education, except for non-distance education courses that are offered on a Laurentian campus.
(v) Immediate Family shall mean a spouse, sibling, parent or child whether related by blood, adoption, marriage or
common-law relationship.
(w) Conflict of interest shall mean a situation where an individual stands to benefit from a decision being made with
respect to a person who is a member of the individual’s immediate family, or with whom the individual has any relationship
of an intimate and/or financial and/or commercial nature either current or past, including any student- supervisor
relationship or any other past or present relationship, which conflicts or appears to conflict with the individual’s
responsibility to the University and includes
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 12

Collective Agreement 2008-11 an actual, apparent and/or perceived conflict of interest.
ARTICLE 1.35 – COPIES
1.35.1 The Employer shall, within thirty (30) days after the respective bargaining committees have approved the
translation of the Collective Agreement, provide at no charge, a copy of this Collective Agreement in both official
languages to each Member of the
Union, and upon request to individuals who were employed as Sessional Lecturers during the previous three (3) years.
1.35.2 The Employer shall also issue, at no charge, a copy of the Collective Agreement to each new appointee, whose
appointment falls within the Bargaining Unit, no later than with the offer of appointment.
1.35.3 The cost of producing any additional copies shall be borne by the Party that requests them.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 13

Collective Agreement 2008-11
RELATIONS BETWEEN THE UNION AND THE EMPLOYER
ARTICLE 2.10 – RECOGNITION OF THE EMPLOYER
2.10.1 Composition
Laurentian University of Sudbury is incorporated under the Statutes of the Province of Ontario, 1960,
Chapter 151 as amended by 1961-62, Chapter 154.
2.10.2 Rights
The Union recognises that the Employer has retained and shall possess and exercise all rights and functions, powers,
privileges and authority that the
Employer possessed under the Act of Incorporation prior to the signing of this Collective Agreement with the Union,
excepting only those that are clearly and specifically relinquished or restricted in this Collective
Agreement, or modified by statute. The Employer undertakes that all rights and functions, powers, privileges and authority
shall be exercised in a manner consistent with the provisions of this
Collective Agreement.
ARTICLE 2.15 – RECOGNITION OF THE BARGAINING UNIT
2.15.1 The Employer recognises the Union as the exclusive
Bargaining Agent for the Bargaining Unit(s) defined in the Ontario Labour Relations Board Certificates of
July 9, 1979, March 28,1994, and October 31,1995
(which are attached as appendixes to this
Memorandum of Agreement) and any amendments to these certificates.
ARTICLE 2.20 – EMPLOYMENT OF NON-MEMBERS
2.20.1 The Employer agrees that, except as otherwise provided for in this Article, it will not employ
Non-Members to teach in the programs of/or offer professional library service in the University.
Membership in the Bargaining Unit is defined in
Article 2.15 – Recognition of the Bargaining Unit.
2.20.2 Notwithstanding the generality of clause 2.20.1 above, nothing in this Collective Agreement is intended to prevent
the Employer from assigning a teaching load to individuals that are precluded from membership in the Bargaining Unit by
virtue of their position as described in the Ontario Labour Relations
Board Certificates designated in Article 2.15 –
Recognition of the Bargaining Unit. The Union will exercise reason in entering into Memoranda of
Agreement to allow the assignment of occasional teaching loads to qualified individuals who hold
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 14

Collective Agreement 2008-11 senior administrative posts within the University and whose official functions could
reasonably be deemed to be inconsistent with Union Membership.
2.20.3 As per the Ontario Labour Relations Board
Certificate, Visiting and Exchange professors/librarians may work outside the
Bargaining Unit.
2.20.4 Notwithstanding clause 2.20.3 above, Non-Members of the Bargaining Unit must not participate in decisions by the
Department/School on personnel matters except as specified in this Collective
Agreement.
ARTICLE 2.25 – SENIOR ACADEMIC ADMINISTRATORS
2.25.1 Selection
While retaining the right to appoint Senior Academic
Administrators, including the President, the Employer recognises the usefulness and desirability of consultation with
Members, Units and Divisions in their selection, and shall follow the selection and appointment procedures that have been
approved by the Board of Governors and the Senate. In instances where an outside applicant is being considered for a
senior academic appointment, the applicant will normally be offered an appointment according to their qualifications at a
rank consistent with the criteria listed under Article 5.20 – Appointment and
Renewal.
2.25.2 Removal
The Employer shall consider all serious complaints against Senior Academic Administrators and take appropriate action,
including the possibility of removal from office. It is understood that if a majority of Members of the Bargaining Unit within
the
Administrator's purview indicate dissatisfaction with that Administrator, the University will view this as one example of a
serious complaint.
2.25.3 Re-entry into the Bargaining Unit
(a) Any Senior Academic Administrators, who are excluded from the Bargaining Unit by virtue of their office, shall upon
resignation/retirement/removal from that office or upon being made redundant or in the event of closure of the office return
to take-up
Membership in the Bargaining Unit.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 15

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(b) No Member shall be displaced from the
Department/School by the entry or re-entry of former Senior Academic Administrators. If there is no vacancy in the
Department/School concerned, the additional allocation shall not be at the expense of another
Department/School allocation.
(c) For all purposes relating to this Collective
Agreement, membership in the Bargaining
Unit of a Senior Academic Administrator shall be reckoned as if they had not been outside the Bargaining Unit during their
term of office.
(d) Senior Academic Administrators returning to the Bargaining Unit shall be considered as
Members teaching for the first time (as per paragraph 5.40.8 (d) of Article 5.40 –
Academic Workload) and shall be assigned teaching/professional library loads in keeping with the practice of their
respective
Department/School(s).
2.25.4 Acting or Substitute Senior Academic
Administrators
(a) The University may from time to time appoint members of the Bargaining Unit to act or substitute for short periods of
time in the place of Senior Academic Administrators.
Members so serving shall not undertake or be required to undertake any personnel action.
(b) For longer periods, i.e. two (2) months or more, when there is a need for an appointee to substitute or act with full
authority and responsibility of office, a Member who so acts shall cease to be a Member of the Bargaining
Unit for the period of substituting or acting and shall receive a pro-rated stipend for the position.
2.25.5 Relationship between Senior Academic
Administrators and Departments/Schools.
Senior Academic Administrators shall be considered full Members of Departments/Schools in which they teach/offer
professional library service, except that they must not participate in decisions by the
Department/School on personnel matters.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 16

Collective Agreement 2008-11
ARTICLE 2.30 – EXISTING PRACTICES
2.30.1 Prior to modifying or discontinuing any working conditions not covered by the Collective Agreement but possessed
by all Members of the Bargaining Unit or by a group thereof, the Employer agrees to give notice of such change or
discontinuance to the
Union.
2.30.2 The Union shall be afforded the opportunity to make a representation to the Employer through the Joint
Consultative Committee for the Administration of the
Collective Agreement prior to the implementation of any change as defined in clause 2.30.1 above. After such
representation, the Employer has the right to proceed providing the change or discontinuance is urgent and reasonable.
ARTICLE 2.35 – MODIFICATIONS TO THE LEGAL STATUS
OF THE UNIVERSITY
2.35.1 Amendment to The Act
Any future proposals by the Employer to amend the
Laurentian University of Sudbury Act, 1960 shall be presented to the Legislative Assembly of the
Province of Ontario, after consultation with the Union.
2.35.2 Amalgamation, Consolidation, Merger or
Expansion of The University
(a) In the event of a merger or amalgamation or a transfer of jurisdiction, the provisions of the
Labour Relations Act, 1995 of Ontario shall apply, particularly sections 62 and 63.
(b) This Collective Agreement shall bind the transferees or assignees of the University or of the Union.
ARTICLE 2.40 – RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES OF THE UNION
2.40.1 (a) The Employer agrees to provide the Union with the use of a serviced office, in an academic area of the
University.
(b) The Employer agrees to provide to the Union room L-303 (not including L-305) as a common room for use by
Members, Senior
Administrators and their guests.
2.40.2 The Union shall have access to the internal postal service of the University. Normal practice of charging for
external mail will apply.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 17

Collective Agreement 2008-11
2.40.3 The Employer shall permit the Union to use
University premises as meeting rooms on the same basis as University organisations.
2.40.4 The Employer will allow the Union to use University printing, computer, and audio-visual facilities at the same rate
as University users, subject to availability.
2.40.5 The Employer agrees to continue to extend a monthly account, due when rendered, to which charges incurred by
the Union shall be debited.
2.40.6 The Union may request, prior to May 8 of the preceding academic year, that Members be relieved by the
appropriate Dean/University Librarian of up to twelve (12) credits of a teaching workload, or its equivalent in the case of
the Library, during the course of an academic year. Such requests shall not be unreasonably refused. In any one
academic year no more than thirty-six (36) credits of reductions will be granted in total.
If, on the recommendation of the Dean/University
Librarian concerned in consultation with the
Department/School, a replacement is required to take on the duties of which a Member has been relieved, the Union will
reimburse the Employer for a maximum of one (1) sessional payment for each six
(6) credit equivalent reduction that it has requested based on the rate of pay for Sessional Members without establishment
status as specified in Article
4.55 – Rates of Pay for Sessional Members.
If a replacement is not required, the Union will still reimburse the Employer for a maximum of one (1) sessional payment
for each six (6) credit equivalent reduction that it has requested based on the rate of pay for Sessional Members without
establishment status as specified in Article 4.55 – Rates of Pay for
Sessional Members and, in this case, the funds will be transferred by the Employer to the
Department(s)/School(s) affected by the workload reductions to be used by the Department/School as it deems
appropriate in accordance with generally accepted university policy.
Funds will be transferred by the Union to the
Employer within thirty (30) working days of being informed about the disposition of the funds. If the funds are to cover a
replacement, the name of the instructor, plus the course to be taught, or its equivalent in the case of the library, shall be
supplied to the Union.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 18

Collective Agreement 2008-11
2.40.7 The Union shall have the right at any time to call upon the assistance of representatives of the
Canadian Association of University Teachers and the
Ontario Confederation of University Faculty
Associations. Such representatives and any other duly designated representatives or counsel for the
Union shall have access to Laurentian University premises to consult with Members, Union officials or the Employer.
These representatives designated by the Union shall participate in discussions or negotiations with representatives of the
Employer when their authority has been communicated to the
Employer by the Union.
2.40.8 The President of the Union, or someone designated by the President of the Union, and a second Member
designated by the President of the Union, shall continue to be non-voting members of the Board of
Governors.
2.40.9 The President of the Union, or someone designated by the President of the Union, shall continue to be a
non-voting member of the Finance Committee of the
Board of Governors.
2.40.10 The Employer agrees to continue current practices with respect to release time for Union activities provided these
practices are known and reasonable.
2.40.11 The Union shall maintain its current representation of one (1) member on the University Advisory
Committee on Security Services.
2.40.12 The President of the Union or someone designated by the President, and two (2) additional Members designated
by the President of the Union, shall continue to be voting members of the University
Pension Committee. Given the importance of pensions, on substantive matters, the Union’s
Board has the right to ratify the recommendations of its representatives.
ARTICLE 2.45 – DUES CHECK-OFF
2.45.1 No Member shall be required to join the Union as a condition of employment. Except as hereinafter specified, the
Employer shall deduct once monthly during the term of this Collective Agreement from the salary of each Member of the
Bargaining Unit monthly dues or other assessments for general
Union purposes uniformly and regularly payable by a
Member of the Union authorised in accordance with the Constitution and by-laws of the Union and certified in writing to
the Employer by the Union.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 19

Collective Agreement 2008-11
2.45.2 At the commencement of the Collective Agreement, the Union shall advise the Employer in writing of the amount of
its regular monthly membership dues.
Thereafter the Union shall advise the University in writing of any change in the amount of regular monthly membership
dues, such notice to be given at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of such change. The Union shall limit the
change in membership dues to no more than three (3) times per year.
2.45.3 Except as hereinafter specified, the amounts so deducted shall be remitted to the Union by the fifteenth (15th) of
the month following the month in which the deductions are made together with a list specifying the names of those
Members of the
Bargaining Unit from whose salaries the aforementioned deductions have been made and the individual amount of each
member's deduction. The
Employer shall with the list aforesaid provide the names of all Members who have ceased to be employees of the
University.
2.45.4 The Employer shall deduct from the salary of each
Member of the Bargaining Unit who obtains an order from the Ontario Labour Relations Board under section 47 of the
Labour Relations Act, 1995 of
Ontario (directing that the said Member is not required to pay monthly dues or other assessments to the Union because of
her/his religious conviction or belief) an amount equal to the monthly dues or other assessments for general Union
purposes uniformly and regularly payable by a Member of the
Union and shall remit said amount on behalf of the said Member to the University's Scholarship Funds.
2.45.5 In the event the Union wrongfully receives dues hereunder on account of an employee who is not a
Member of the Union, or if on account of a Member of the Union but in excess of the amount required, the Union agrees
to reimburse or credit the employee as the case may be for the amount so received. The
Union shall indemnify and save harmless the
University against any action arising out of the wrongful deductions of money for Union dues resulting from the Union's
instructions and the refusal of the Union to reimburse the employee, within sixty
(60) days of the lodging of her/his claim.
2.45.6 At the time that Income Tax T4 slips are provided to each Member by the University, the University shall indicate
on the T4 slips or separately in writing to each Member the deductions from her/his salary under this Article.
ARTICLE 2.50 – INFORMATION
2.50.1 The Parties recognise that their mutual goals stated in Article 1.20 – Purpose of the Collective Agreement
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 20

Collective Agreement 2008-11 can only be realised if both Parties have access to necessary information required for
effective collective bargaining and the proper administration of this
Collective Agreement. Both Parties agree to use professional discretion in dealing with this information. This information
shall be provided in hard copy and, where feasible, electronically.
2.50.2 To that end the Employer undertakes to provide the
Union with the following, at the times indicated:
(a) In October and February of each year, an electronic and hard copy list of each full-time
Member of the Bargaining Unit which includes the name, gender, language, department/school, faculty/library, campus,
rank (if applicable), actual salary, nominal salary, whether tenured/permanent, probationary or limited term. For Members
designated as ‘On Leave’, the list shall indicate the type of leave that the Member is on.
(b) In October, February, and May of each year, a list showing the name, salary, establishment status, and courses taught
that contribute to the Sessional Seniority of each Member of the Bargaining Unit who is employed during the current
academic session.
(c) In October of each year a list of all limited term appointments and the reasons for the appointment categorised
according to paragraphs 5.20.10 (a) to (e) of Article 5.20 –
Appointment and Renewal.
(d) In October, February and May of each year a list showing the name, courses taught on overload/professional library
service rendered and amount of money paid to each full-time
Member of the Bargaining Unit during the current academic session.
(e) In October, February and May of each year a list showing the name, courses taught on overload/professional library
service rendered and amount of money paid to each non-member during the current academic session.
(f) In October of each year a list including the names of all full-time Members with course or
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 21

Collective Agreement 2008-11 workload release during the current academic year including the amount and reason for
the release granted.
(g) In October of each year a statement of the number of full-time Members of the
Bargaining Unit that did not expend all of the professional allowance available to them as provided in Article 6.45 –
Professional
Development Expenditures, and the total amount of funds left unexpended as of June
30 of the previous year.
(h) A copy of the letters of appointment of all new full-time Faculty Members who accept employment with the University
subsequent to the signing of this Collective Agreement by both Parties shall be supplied to the Union within fifteen (15)
days of receipt of the said executed letters of appointment.
(i) A copy of the letters of appointment of all
Sessional Lecturers who accept employment with the University subsequent to the ratification of this Collective
Agreement by both Parties. Such letters of appointment shall be supplied to the Union within fifteen (15) days of receipt of
said executed letters of appointment.
(j) A copy of the contracts issued to all full-time
Faculty Members who have been granted sabbatical leave or any other kind of leave.
Such contracts shall be supplied to the Union within fifteen (15) days after acceptance by the Member.
(k) A copy of patent and copyright contracts as per Article 6.30 – Patents and Article 6.35 –
Copyright.
(l) In October of each year, the total salary allocation and median salary for:
(i) Senior administration;
(ii) Part-time employees outside the
Bargaining Unit by
Department/School;
(iii) Any other teaching or research employees outside the Bargaining
Unit;
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 22

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(iv) Library employees outside the
Bargaining Unit.
(m) A copy of the course master and updates to the course master when they become available.
(n) A copy of the University's annual audited financial statements and supporting schedules, following approval of these
by the
Board of Governors.
(o) A copy of employment equity data including the number of women and men applying for each advertised position, the
gender, highest degree and years of experience for each applicant chosen for the interview list. Such information will be
forwarded to the Union by
September 30 of each year.
(p) A copy of advertisements for faculty positions shall be sent to the Union once they have been approved by the Office
of the Vice
President, Academic.
(q) A copy of any mailings forwarded by the
Employer to Members, to be sent to the
Union at the same time as the general mailing.
(r) A copy of all minutes, actuarial reports and benefit reports of the Pension and Benefits
Committees.
(s) Thirty (30) days after the signing of this
Collective Agreement, a copy of all present articulation agreements between the
Employer and all public and private education institutions.
(t) A copy of all new articulation agreements between the Employer and all public and private education institutions within
thirty
(30) days of the signing of the said agreements.
2.50.3 The Union agrees to provide the Employer with:
(a) Copies of any mailings made by the Union to all its Members, to be sent to the Employer at the same time as the
general mailing.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 23

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(b) Copies of any statements or representations made or to be made publicly by the Union.
(c) An up-to-date copy of the constitution of the
Union.
(d) An up-to-date list of the Executive of the
Union.
2.50.4 Each Member, who has not previously done so, shall when requested supply the Personnel Office with one
(1) copy of her/his birth certificate (or other equivalent documentation attesting to the date of birth).
2.50.5 It is understood that this section shall not be construed to require either Party to supply any information that is
confidential with respect to matters relating to labour relations.
2.50.6 Each Party agrees to inform the other Party when statistical information concerning Members is released as
required by law or in response to a request from a government body or agency, and further, to inform the other Party of
the nature of the information requested or released. Except when required by law, the Employer agrees not to release any
individually identifiable statistical data in aggregate form concerning Members to any person, body, agency, and institution
without the written consent of the Union.
2.50.7 One (1) individual shall be chosen by each Party to coordinate the exchange of information and to act as liaison
between the two Parties.
2.50.8 Nothing in this Article is meant to preclude either side of this Collective Agreement from making reasonable
requests for additional information from time to time.
Both Parties agree to fulfil such requests.
ARTICLE 2.55 – CORRESPONDENCE
2.55.1 In conformity with section 113 of the Ontario Labour
Relations Act, 1995, except where otherwise expressly provided in this Collective Agreement, notices required to be given
under the provisions of this Collective Agreement shall be in writing and shall be sufficient either if addressed to the
appropriate recipient and sent by campus mail or Canada Post, or if delivered to the appropriate recipient personally with
a signed receipt required.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 24

Collective Agreement 2008-11
2.55.2 Notices to and official correspondence with the Union shall be addressed to the attention of the President of the
Union or the President of the Union's designate.
2.55.3 Notices to and official correspondence with the
Employer shall be addressed to the Vice-President,
Academic.
ARTICLE 2.60 – JOINT CONSULTATIVE COMMITTEE FOR
THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE COLLECTIVE AGREEMENT
2.60.1 The President of the Union or the President of the
Union's designate and the Vice-President, Academic or the Vice-President, Academic's designate shall act as liaison
between the two Parties as required by this
Collective Agreement as well as coordinate and exchange information as per Article 2.50 –
Information.
2.60.2 When either Party deems it advisable, its representative may be accompanied by one (1) or more advisers.
2.60.3 The Parties are authorised from time to time to enter into Memoranda of Agreement with regard to the
Collective Agreement. The Parties may from time to time authorise other representatives, in addition to the
Vice-President, Academic and the President of the Union, to sign these Memoranda of Agreement.
2.60.4 The Parties agree to form a Joint Consultative
Committee for the Administration of the Collective
Agreement, composed of three (3) representatives of each Party as follows: the President of the Union and the
Vice-President, Academic or their respective designates; one (1) officer of LUFA and one (1) Dean appointed by the
Vice-President, Academic; and one
(1) appointee from each Party.
2.60.5 The Committee shall attempt:
(a) To maintain and develop a spirit of cooperation and mutual respect between the
Parties.
(b) To facilitate better working relationships between the Employer and the Union and its
Members.
(c) To discuss, review, and make recommendations to the Parties on matters of concern to either Party.
2.60.6 The Committee shall meet once in November and once in February and at other times when deemed useful or
necessary by mutual agreement of the
Parties.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 25

Collective Agreement 2008-11
2.60.7 The Committee shall be chaired in alternation by a representative of the Employer and a representative of the
Union. The chair shall be responsible for preparing and distributing the agendas and preparing minutes of meetings.
2.60.8 The Committee shall determine its own procedures subject to the provision that a quorum shall consist of at least
two (2) representatives of each Party.
2.60.9 The Committee shall not have the power to add to or to modify the terms of this Collective Agreement.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 26

Collective Agreement 2008-11
WORKING CONDITIONS
ARTICLE 3.10 – ACADEMIC FREEDOM
3.10.1 In addition to their legal rights as citizens, Members have the right to academic freedom. Academic freedom is the
right to search for truth, knowledge and understanding and to express freely what one believes. The University as an
institution and the community of its scholars have a duty to protect and defend the search for knowledge and truth by all
that enquire, teach, offer professional library service and learn under its auspices. They shall be free to carry out research
and to publish its results, free to teach, to discuss and to criticise both the University and the wider society it serves
subject to the provisions of
Article 3.15 – No Discrimination, Harassment or
Bullying.
3.10.2 Academic freedom entails the obligation to base all research and teaching on a responsible search for truth and
knowledge. It requires the fulfilment of responsibilities to other members of the teaching and learning community. It
requires the acknowledgement of the work of others and the acceptance of responsibility for one's own beliefs and
utterances. Academic freedom does not confer legal immunity.
3.10.3 The Parties agree to safeguard, as far as reasonably possible, the privacy of information, whether on paper or in
electronic form, that is exclusively personal to and in the possession of, individual Members.
ARTICLE 3.15 – NO DISCRIMINATION, HARASSMENT OR
BULLYING
3.15.1 The Employer recognizes the need to provide an environment free from discrimination and harassment, including
bullying. To that end, the
Employer has established a Human Rights Office, headed by a Human Rights Advisor. The Union acknowledges the
Employer’s Policy on a
Respectful Workplace and Learning Environment.
This policy will be used by the Employer in dealing with all incidents of alleged discrimination, harassment, or bullying at
Laurentian University.
3.15.2 The Union shall observe and assist in the implementation of rules adopted to protect employees and the University
Community against discrimination and harassment (including bullying).
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 27

Collective Agreement 2008-11
3.15.3 (a) The Parties agree that there shall be no discrimination, harassment, bullying, interference, restriction or
coercion exercised or practiced with respect to any Member in regard to salaries, rank, appointment, promotion, tenure,
reappointment, dismissal, leaves, benefits, or any other matter arising from this Collective Agreement, by reason of age
(except for retirement as provided for in this Collective Agreement or by legislation), race, language (except where the
lack of language competence would clearly prevent carrying out the required duties), creed, colour, ancestry, ethnic or
cultural background, national origin, political or religious affiliation or belief, sex, sexual orientation, marital status, family
relationship, personal or social life style or behaviour, clerical or lay status, disability (except where the physical, emotional
or mental condition would clearly prevent the carrying out of the required duties).
(b) The Parties agree, however, that no Members or person acting as an officer of the University shall take part in formal
discussions or vote with respect to the determination of any term or condition of employment of a member of her/his
immediate family as defined in Article
1.30 – Definitions.
3.15.4 The choice of the most competent person for the post as described in an advertisement formally approved by the
Vice-President, Academic in consultation with the Department/School will not constitute discrimination.
3.15.5 In the case of the evaluation of applicants for appointment, renewal, tenure and promotion, the criteria adopted
must not systematically discriminate against members of designated groups and shall be periodically reviewed to ensure
that work done predominantly by members of designated groups is not undervalued.
3.15.6 There shall be no discrimination with respect to any
Member arising from membership or activity in the
Union, or from a failure to join or participate in the
Union.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 28

Collective Agreement 2008-11
3.15.7 This Article shall not preclude any action that has as its object the equitable representation of designated
employment equity target groups throughout the academic community.
ARTICLE 3.20 – WORKING ENVIRONMENT
3.20.1 The Employer acknowledges its responsibility to provide and maintain facilities, services and general working
conditions, which support the effective discharge by full-time Members of their responsibilities as specified in Article 5.15 –
Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of Academics. The
Employer will determine by consideration of the financial resources of the University, the manner in which and the level at
which facilities and services are provided to Members. Additionally, the
Employer will provide, in a fair and equitable manner, at least a securable individual office for each full-time Member and
securable group offices for Sessional Members, ergonomically appropriate office furniture, appropriate lighting and
ventilation, and will maintain reasonable levels of working space, secretarial and other support services, including
telephones, computing, printing, duplicating, library services, technical services, teaching and research assistance and
laboratory space if required.
All moving expenses to relocate Members within the
University shall be paid by the Employer.
3.20.2 The Employer acknowledges the importance of providing well-designed, healthy and attractive physical working
spaces and of Members playing a substantive role in decisions affecting their working environment, particularly offices,
classrooms, studios, research and laboratory spaces. To this end, the Parties agree to establish a Joint
Committee on Working Space within ninety (90) days of the signing of the Collective Agreement.
Each Party shall name three (3) members of the
Committee; as well, the Parties shall jointly agree to a Chair who shall be non-voting except in the case of a tie vote.
The purpose of the Committee shall be:
(a) to hear concerns about substandard working spaces and to recommend solutions
(b) to recommend ergonomic standards in offices, through creating model offices and developing design standards
including but not limited to furniture, equipment, lighting, and ventilation; and to continue and ensure
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 29

Collective Agreement 2008-11 implementation of the program for provision of Ergonomic Work Stations as initiated in the
2005-08 Collective Agreement (Article
1.23.2) and as funded according to clause
3.20.3 below
(c) to recommend design standards for any renovation or new construction of offices, classrooms, studios, research and
laboratory spaces
(d) to recommend policies that contribute to the fair and equitable distribution of space and improve the quality of
Laurentian’s working environment.
3.20.3 The Employer shall establish a budget of thirty-five thousand dollars ($35,000) per year, or such other greater sum
as the two Parties may mutually agree during the life of this Collective Agreement for the provision of such furniture, work
stations and equipment according to the recommendations of the Working Space Committee. In addition, funds
unexpended for the Provision of Ergonomic Work
Stations from the thirty-five thousand dollars
($35,000) per year provided over the three (3) years of the 2005-08 Collective Agreement shall continue to be available.
For the purposes of this Article,
“furniture, work stations and equipment” shall be deemed to include, but not to be limited to, chairs, desks, computer
tables, lighting, foot rest, and such computer peripherals as the keyboard, mouse, screen-glare guard, and wrist support
bar, all of a high standard.
3.20.4 On an annual basis all Members, including retirees, upon request, will be supplied with a photo identification library
card at no cost to them except if they require a replacement for a lost card. The charge for replacement will be fifteen
dollars ($15) per card.
3.20.5 In their offices and once every four (4) years,
Members shall be supplied with “a standard computer” as determined by the Computer Allocation
Committee, which shall be networked, attached to a network printer, and maintained without charge to the
Members and Departments/Schools for the full four
(4) years. The Computer Allocation Committee shall consist of two (2) members selected by the Union and two (2)
members selected by the Employer. The
Committee shall also review and update the plan for continued implementation of this policy, including the availability and
maintenance of computers for
Sessional Members, which shall be a minimum of one
(1) standard computer for every group office for
Sessional Members.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 30

Collective Agreement 2008-11
3.20.6 Full-time Members shall be offered a securable individual office located in reasonable proximity to the
Department’s/School’s main office. A Member’s office shall not be entered except by authorized
University staff.
3.20.7 All full-time Members teaching in the School of
Human Kinetics shall be granted free lockers outside the general area and membership service without fee. All Sessional
Members teaching activity courses and experientially based courses in the School of Human Kinetics shall be granted the
same privilege during the session(s) in which they are employed.
ARTICLE 3.25 – HEALTH, SAFETY AND SECURITY
3.25.1 The Employer recognises a responsibility to provide an environment intended to protect the health, safety and
security of employees as they carry out their responsibilities. To that end, the Parties agree that they are bound by the
Occupational Health and
Safety Act R.S.O 1990 as revised and in effect July
1, 2008. The Employer agrees to maintain a Joint
Health and Safety Committee, which will independently consider matters concerning the health and safety of employees
and students. This
Committee shall include two (2) representatives of all unionized groups in the University (including
LUFA), as well as one (1) representative of the
Science/Engineering Safety Committee and one (1)
Employer representative with power to co-opt other members.
The Committee's work will include an examination of procedures and physical facilities brought to its attention, as these
relate to health, safety and security.
3.25.2 The Union shall observe and assist in the implementation of rules adopted to protect the health and safety of
employees and to maintain the security of persons and premises.
3.25.3 Members who have reason to believe that a work situation is likely to endanger them have the right to refuse
unsafe work pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of the Ontario Occupational
Health and Safety Act.
ARTICLE 3.30 – BILINGUALISM
3.30.1 The Universityis committed to the fulfillment of its role as bilingual institution of higher learning, in accordance with
the Laurentian University of
Sudbury Act. The Employer and the Union pledge themselves to the maintenance and promotion of both official
languages, French and English, as well
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 31

Collective Agreement 2008-11 as both cultures.
Notwithstanding the above, the Employer and the
Union acknowledge the distinct role and the important contribution of Aboriginal languages and cultures in particular
programs at Laurentian
University. Further, the Employer and the Union recognize that in the University as a whole
Aboriginal faculty are underrepresented and agree as per Article 5.30 – Aboriginal Equity Initiative to establish an
Aboriginal equity initiative, and to waive the requirement for French/English bilingualism and recognize as bilingualism the
knowledge and/or demonstrated study of an
Aboriginal language and one (1) of the two (2) official languages of Laurentian University.
3.30.2 In accordance with the commitment stated in clause
3.30.1 above, the Employer recognizes the right of all Members to communicate directly (verbally and in writing) in the
official language of their choice with all University Departments, Schools, Research and Administrative services for all
official transactions.
3.30.3 The two Parties shall have the right to be heard in either official language and to require the translation of any
official materials. Members have the right to express themselves in the official language of their choice.
3.30.4 The two Parties agree to make every effort to provide a translation of non-official documents where either Party
requires such.
3.30.5 (a) A Joint Committee of two (2) representatives chosen by the Employer and two (2) representatives chosen by
the Union, distributed equitably between the two (2) official languages, shall prepare the guidelines and requirements for
competency required to enable each Member to meet the bilingualism requirements stated in her/his
Letter of Appointment, in accordance with clause 5.20.8 of Article 5.20 – Appointment and Renewal. The
recommendations of the
Joint Committee shall be approved by the
Employer and the Union. The Joint
Committee shall convene before January 1,
2009 and present its recommendations before July 1, 2009.
(b) The Employer agrees to provide language training at no cost in the course of the entire year at beginner, intermediate
and advanced levels in order to enable Members to a) meet the requirements of bilingualism stated in
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 32

Collective Agreement 2008-11 their Letter of Appointment in accordance with clause 5.20.8 of Article 5.20 –
Appointment and Renewal and b) maintain and improve their skills.
(c) The Employer shall inform all new Members about language requirements for both official languages on an annual
basis until tenure is granted, in order to allow Members to prepare themselves adequately to meet the language
requirements for the granting of tenure.
3.30.6 A Member’s course syllabuses, course notes and presentations (regardless of their format), whether distributed,
projected or transmitted in any and all media, shall be written in the course’s language of instruction. The Member shall
ensure that a terminology index is available to students if certain required readings are not in the language of instruction.
ARTICLE 3.35 – CONFLICT OF INTEREST
3.35.1 No individual shall knowingly participate in any academic or administrative decision, including decisions regarding
commercial contracts or transactions, that benefits the individual, affects or benefits a person from whom the individual
stands to derive a financial benefit or affects or benefits a person in a situation as defined in Article 1.30 –
Definitions.
3.35.2 In the event the affected individual determines that a conflict exists of sufficient seriousness to compromise the
integrity of the decision-making process, the affected individual shall declare the nature and extent of the interest as soon
as possible and no later than the meeting(s) at which the matter is to be considered and the individual in conflict shall:
(a) withdraw from the meeting where the matter is being discussed;
(b) refrain from taking part in any other discussion of the matter; and
(c) refrain from voting on the matter.
In the event there is a disagreement as to whether a conflict of interest exists, the Vice-President,
Academic or her/his designate will decide the matter and the remedy will follow, accordingly. Decisions of the
Vice-President, Academic or her/his designate can be challenged through the grievance procedure.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 33

Collective Agreement 2008-11
3.35.3 The term “individual” in this Article includes Members of the Bargaining Unit and management representatives.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 34

Collective Agreement 2008-11
SESSIONAL MEMBERS
ARTICLE 4.10 – APPOINTMENT PROVISIONS FOR
SESSIONAL MEMBERS
4.10.1 The Parties recognise that the University's mission is best served by a largely full-time faculty and that it is not
generally desirable to make sessional appointments a substitute for full-time faculty.
4.10.2 At the same time, the Parties recognise that sessional faculty add a significant level of diversity, expertise and
practical experience to the University, and their value must be recognised in the governance and decision-making
processes and generally in the on-going life of the University.
4.10.3 Teaching/professional librarianship duties comprise the only assigned function for Sessional Lecturers.
ARTICLE 4.15 – APPOINTMENT AND RENEWAL FOR
SESSIONAL MEMBERS
Appointment of Sessional Members of the Bargaining Unit
4.15.1 Appointments of Sessional Lecturers are made by the Vice-President, Academic or her/his designate on behalf of
the Employer and on the recommendation of the Dean/University Librarian and the Department/School concerned. The
recommendation may be made by the
Department/School as a whole, or by a committee consisting of no fewer than three (3) Members.
4.15.2 Sessional appointments and other extra-departmental assignments of courses shall be made from rosters of
names of potential instructors maintained by the Departments/Schools responsible for the particular course. This will
enable appointments to be made expeditiously and at the same time in a way that honours Sessional
Members' seniority and other rights.
4.15.3 Sessional Members on the University roster shall be notified of the courses expected to be offered in their
Department(s)/School(s) in all sessions of the upcoming year. This shall be done by April 15.
Such notice must specify clearly the course, courses, or type of course to which it applies.
Sessional Members interested in teaching any of the available courses shall send a letter of application to the
Chair/Director of the
Department/School by May 15.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 35

Collective Agreement 2008-11
4.15.4 A letter of application, a current curriculum vitae, a current teaching dossier and any relevant supporting
documentation shall be filed with the
Department/School by the above dates. Notice may be given simply to bring forward a letter of application from previous
sessions, but curriculum vitae and teaching dossiers must be kept up to date.
4.15.5 Sessional Members may have their names added to the rosters after the above dates. In such cases seniority and
other rights shall not be enforceable.
4.15.6 Departments/Schools shall not be precluded from advertising or otherwise soliciting applications to their rosters,
either before or after the above dates.
4.15.7 When courses cannot be made part of full-time
Members’ normal teaching loads they shall be offered by the Department/School in the form of overload appointments or
sessional contracts.
Full-time Members, previous and current Sessional
Members, Retirees, and other qualified applicants may apply for these contracts. In awarding them, the Chair/Director of
the Department/School, in consultation with the appropriate Dean/University
Librarian shall follow the criteria for establishment and seniority listed in clauses 4.15.12 to 4.15.21 below, and for
overloads in paragraph 5.40.6 (b) of
Article 5.40 – Academic Workload.
4.15.8 During October of each year the Employer will circulate to all Departments/Schools, the Union and the Library a list
of courses taught on an overload basis by full-time Members of faculty or by
Sessional Members during the two (2) previous academic years. The list will also be posted on the
Laurentian University Human Resources website.
Departments/Schools will be requested to post these lists on their respective websites. All courses listed will be deemed
to have been posted.
4.15.9 When a Sessional appointment will be required for any other course, an advertisement shall be posted on a bulletin
board by the Department/School with a copy sent to the Union and to the Library. The list will also be posted on the
Laurentian University
Human Resources website and the
Department/School website. The rosters shall remain open until ten (10) working days after the posting on the bulletin
board by the
Department/School. Any outstanding course may
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 36

Collective Agreement 2008-11 be advertised locally.
4.15.10 Full-time Members wishing to teach courses for which Departments/Schools other than their own are responsible
shall be governed by the same procedures and dates as Sessional Members.
Article 5.40 – Academic Workload and Article 8.35 –
Overloads also govern such assignments.
4.15.11 In exceptional circumstances where appointments must be made shortly before, or even after, the
commencement of instruction, and where time does not allow full compliance with the above procedures
(e.g., in cases of illness of a Member originally scheduled to teach; opening of a new section of a course(s); unanticipated
commencements of
Leaves of Absence, etc.) the ten (10) day period referred to above shall be waived, but the Employer undertakes that
reasonable efforts will be made not to violate the appointment rights and seniority protection of Members intended by the
foregoing.
The Employer shall inform the Union of each appointment made under this clause and the circumstances thereof
forthwith. Any individual so appointed shall provide a letter of application and a current curriculum vitae.
Establishment of Sessional Members
4.15.12 Sessional Members shall be deemed to have
Establishment status with respect of a particular course once they have been appointed to teach it for their third (3rd)
academic year. Such sessional contracts need not be in consecutive academic years, but in no case shall exceed the
previous six
(6) academic years.
4.15.13 Retirees shall be deemed to have Establishment status with respect to a particular course either when they have
taught a course for the third (3rd) year on sessional contracts or when they have taught a course as part of their regular
workload twice and have been hired at least once to teach a course on a sessional contract. Such sessional contracts or
teaching need not be in consecutive academic years, but in no case shall exceed the previous six (6) academic years.
4.15.14 The names of Established Sessional Lecturers shall be printed in the departmental faculty listings of the next
edition of the Laurentian University Calendar following a year in which an appointment is held.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 37

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Seniority of Sessional Members
4.15.15 A Sessional Member shall accrue seniority credits with respect to a particular course. For the purposes of this
Article, a distinction is made between courses offered in English and in French, and seniority credits shall accrue
separately for each language version of what would otherwise be considered the same course. Where a course is
replaced by a renamed, renumbered, or revised version of what is essentially the same course, or is replaced by a course
that performs the same function in the Department's/School’s curriculum, seniority status shall apply to such a new
course.
4.15.16 Sessional Members shall accrue seniority credit each time they teach a course. Members teaching a particular
course more than once in an academic year, shall accrue seniority credit each time they teach the course. This shall
include one (1) term courses and shall include the spring session or other extra sessions of that academic year.
4.15.17 Sessional Members with Establishment and with highest seniority shall have first right of reappointment, subject
to notice of those rights with respect to a particular term, as specified above.
Seniority entitlement shall, during the Fall, Winter, and Spring sessions, be limited to one section per term for each course
in which a Member holds seniority. (Such rights are also governed by limitations described in clause 4.25.3 of Article 4.25
– Workload Provisions for Sessional Members.)
4.15.18 Years of Seniority shall be the number of years in which a Member qualifies for seniority dated back to
1984. The onus shall be on the Member to establish her/his years of seniority prior to the above roster dates pertinent to
the relevant session.
Evidence might include, but is not limited to, any of the following in which clear identification is made: letters of
appointment, pay records, University and
Continuing Education calendars, course evaluations, grade sheets, administrative letters referring to the course. When
requested, the
Dean/University Librarian with authority for the course in question shall issue a written statement agreeing to reasonably
established seniority claims.
4.15.19 Seniority shall be retained during academic years in which a Sessional Lecturer is not offered reappointment, but
shall not be increased during those academic years. Seniority shall not however be able to be exercised if the Sessional
Lecturer has not been offered reappointment over three (3)
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 38

Collective Agreement 2008-11 consecutive academic years.
4.15.20 However, Seniority shall not be exercised if a
Sessional Lecturer has removed her/his name from a roster, or has declined an offer of appointment, for a second (2nd)
consecutive academic year.
4.15.21 Notwithstanding the foregoing, Sessional Lecturers may request leave from a roster for up to two (2) consecutive
years for parenting, adoption, full or part-time graduate studies or as per Article 7.40 –
Leaves of Absence Without Pay. Such application shall be made on a one (1) year-at-a-time basis and shall not be
unreasonably refused. In such cases seniority shall accrue in respect of the years of leave.
Written Offer of Appointment of Sessional Members
4.15.22 The Parties agree that Offers of Appointment shall be sent to Sessional Lecturers as soon as possible before
classes commence. Except for situations covered by clause 4.15.11 above, the Employer shall endeavour to mail Offers
of Appointment by the following dates: July 15 for the Fall Term,
November 15 for the Winter Term, and March 15 for the Spring Term.
Each Offer of Appointment shall specify the course number(s), the number of credits, terms and conditions of employment
including salary, benefits, sessional seniority, and cancellation conditions if applicable.
4.15.23 A copy of the current Collective Agreement shall be sent with any offer of employment, except where the
applicant would already have received a copy.
4.15.24 A copy of each accepted Offer of Appointment shall be sent to the Union forthwith.
Grievance of Appointment Decision of Sessional Members
4.15.25 In the event that an unsuccessful applicant for a sessional teaching position believes that someone else was
appointed to the position in violation of the provisions of this Collective Agreement, she/he may request within one (1)
month of the decision a review of the appointment with the view of establishing whether the Employer acted in accordance
with the provisions of this Collective
Agreement when not appointing the unsuccessful applicant.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 39

Collective Agreement 2008-11
4.15.26 Such a request for review shall be directed to the
Dean/University Librarian and/or the Union and shall involve initially an informal stage in which the
Dean/University Librarian and a Grievance Officer appointed by the Union have an opportunity to review the available
information. If agreement cannot be reached at the informal stage, the matter shall be dealt with according to the
grievance procedures set out in Article 11.10 – Grievance
Procedure.
ARTICLE 4.20 – PERMANENT APPOINTMENTS FOR
SESSIONAL MEMBERS
4.20.1 Definition: A Permanent Sessional Lecturer with a continuing appointment who is responsible for undergraduate
teaching / clinical education or supervision / language teaching / skills teaching / coaching / writing assistance and other
related duties as determined by the Employer. Nothing in this definition precludes the Employer from working with the
Boards of the three (3) federated universities to create such a position funded jointly by the partners.
4.20.2 Qualifications: At least a Master’s degree or appropriate professional qualifications and with proven competence in
teaching.
4.20.3 Appointments: Any new Permanent Sessional
Lecturer position must be advertised internally before being advertised externally and must go through the normal hiring
process for the appointment of full-time Members. Sessional
Members with Establishment in at least twelve (12) credits or four (4) three (3) credit courses shall have first consideration
for appointment as Permanent
Sessional Lecturer.
In the event there is no qualified internal applicant as determined by the Department/School, the
University may advertise externally. A Member appointed to a Permanent Sessional Lecturer position without
establishment in at least twelve (12) credits at Laurentian University shall have a probationary status of three (3) years.
The evaluation of an applicant on probation shall follow the normal assessment process for full-time
Members as set out in Article 5.50 – Assessment of a Member’s Performance, but shall be restricted to the teaching
responsibilities.
4.20.4 Workload: The normal maximum teaching workload is twenty-four (24) credits of which a maximum of nine (9) may
be assigned in the Spring Session.
There are no obligations or expectations with respect to research or service but nothing preludes
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 40

Collective Agreement 2008-11 a Permanent Sessional Lecturer from participating in either activity voluntarily.
4.20.5 Transfer to Regular Faculty Ranks A Permanent
Sessional Lecturer may be appointed to a regular faculty position without advertising under the following conditions:
(a) The Vice-President, Academic has authorized a position for the
Department/School.
(b) The Chair/Director of the Department/School has made available an application file for viewing by all Members of the
Department/School and has arranged interviews and open meetings with the candidate and Members in the
Department/School, on campus or through telecommunications technology.
(c) A majority of the full-time Members of the
Department/School by vote have approved of the recommendation, including the term of the appointment where
applicable
4.20.6 The salary of each Permanent Sessional Lecturer on July 1 shall be composed of the base salary of each Member
as of June 30 of that year as modified by the following items:
(a) A scale increase as set in paragraph 8.10.1
(a) of Article 8.10 – Salary Structure for the respective year;
(b) A Progress-Through-The-Ranks increment as set in paragraph 8.10.1 (b) of Article 8.10
– Salary Structure for the respective year;
(c) Catch-up as set in paragraph 8.10.1 (e) of
Article 8.10 – Salary Structure for the respective year;
(d) A merit award shall be awarded according to
Article 8.25 – Merit Increments;
The salary structure for 2008-09, 2009-10 and
2010-11 shall be the floor of Lecturer/General
Librarian as set in Article 8.10 – Salary Structure for the respective year.
4.20.7 Starting Salary and Benefits: Based on qualifications and university teaching experience, starting at the floor of
Lecturer and with increments as set out in Article 8.10 – Salary Structure, plus all regular benefits as per Article 8.45 –
Benefits,
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 41

Collective Agreement 2008-11 vacation as per Article 7.15 – Vacation and working conditions as per Article 3.20 –
Working Conditions.
The starting salary of an applicant with previous teaching experience shall be based on one (1) increment for each year of
full-time equivalent at the university level previously taught. The position shall not contain ranks or promotion. Permanent
Sessional Lecturer shall be entitled to the professional development allowance as per Article
6.45 – Professional Development Expenditures.
4.20.8 Article 3.10 – Academic Freedom, Article 5.75 –
Disciplinary Measures, except clause 5.75.7, and
Article 5.80 – Dismissal Procedures shall apply to
Permanent Sessional Lecturers.
4.20.9 Should a Permanent Sessional Lecturer be declared redundant the Member will be entitled to severance pay equal
to one (1) month of salary for each year of service, with a minimum of three (3) months and up to a maximum of eighteen
(18) months.
4.20.10 The University may appoint a maximum of thirty
(30) Permanent Sessional Lecturers.
4.20.11 The Employer agrees to no further appointments to the Alternate Stream. The remaining Alternate
Stream appointments shall be covered by the terms of the 2005-08 Collective Agreement.
4.20.12 Financial Exigency Article 10.15 – Financial
Exigency shall apply to Permanent Sessional
Lecturers. Within a Department/School, a
Permanent Sessional Lecturer shall not be terminated in preference to a non-tenured Member.
When there are more than one Permanent Sessional
Lecturers in a Department/School, the more senior
Member, in terms of service determined from the date at which permanency at the University became effective shall be
retained unless, after applying the criteria in Article 10.15 – Financial Exigency, there is a clear and substantial reason for
doing otherwise.
ARTICLE 4.25 – WORKLOAD PROVISIONS FOR
SESSIONAL MEMBERS
4.25.1 (a) If, once a contract has been executed, the workload of a Sessional Lecturer must be altered, the agreement of
the Member must be obtained.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 42

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(b) Once a contract has been executed with a
Sessional Lecturer, such a contract shall not be cancelled in order to have the duties performed by a Faculty Member with
a full- time appointment.
(c) Cancellation prior to its commencement of a course for which a contract with a Sessional
Lecturer has been executed can occur only in accordance with cancellation clause provisions contained in the contract.
(d) Cancellation clauses shall be used only where there is good reason to believe that enrolment levels may be
vulnerable. In the event of a cancellation the Employer shall:
(i) Attempt to find work of equivalent value for which the Sessional Member is qualified; and failing this
(ii) Shall pay a cancellation fee of fifteen percent (15%) of the agreed salary as outlined in the Letter of Appointment for
courses taught during the Fall and
Winter Terms; or
(iii) Shall pay a fixed amount of two hundred and fifty dollars ($250) per three (3) credit course, to be stated in the Letter of
Appointment, for courses taught during the Spring Session.
Sessional Lecturers shall accrue Sessional
Seniority for all cancelled courses once they have achieved establishment. Cancelled courses shall not count toward
establishment.
4.25.2 The contracts issued to Sessional Librarians shall identify in reasonable detail the hours during which the work is to
be performed. These hours cannot be changed without the consent of the Member. The librarian pay equivalent shall be
deemed to be (___) hours per course credit of pay (the figure used here to be agreed by the Parties prior to any use of
this provision).
4.25.3 The workload of a Sessional Member shall normally not exceed twelve (12) credits per Fall/Winter session
(September to April) and nine (9) credits per
Spring session (May to August). The credits taught by
Sessional Members in off-campus courses shall not be included in these totals.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 43

Collective Agreement 2008-11
ARTICLE 4.30 – TEACHING RIGHTS AND
RESPONSIBILITIES FOR SESSIONAL MEMBERS
4.30.1 Sessional Lecturers shall be covered by the general provisions regarding teaching and professional librarianship in
clauses 5.15.5 to 5.15.18 of Article
5.15 – Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of
Academics except for specific clauses within this section that clearly apply only to full-time faculty.
4.30.2 The Chair/Director of the Department/School shall structure the procedures required by this responsibility in a
reasonable manner.
4.30.3 The Chair/Director of the Department/School shall make procedures regarding Sessional Members a matter of
record.
4.30.4 In all cases where a personnel action affecting
Sessional Members is required, the action shall be an action of the full Department/School Council, even where general
supervision is delegated to the
Chair/Director, to a coordinator, or to a committee.
4.30.5 Sessional Members shall have the right to attend
Departmental/School meetings. In terms of voting rights, Sessional Members shall have the right of up to two (2) voting
representatives as elected annually by the Sessional Members teaching in the respective Department/School. The
number of sessional voting representatives shall be determined by the number of full-time Members in the
Department/School as follows:
One (1) to Nine (9): One (1) Sessional voting representative
Ten (10) and over: Two (2) Sessional voting representatives
4.30.6 The Dean/University Librarian shall make copies of course evaluations of Sessional Members available to the
Members of the Department/School responsible for the appointment or renewal of
Sessional Members. Student course evaluations shall not be the sole means of determining the quality of the Sessional
Member’s teaching performance.
The Sessional Member’s entire teaching dossier shall be considered.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 44

Collective Agreement 2008-11
ARTICLE 4.35 – ANNUAL REPORT FOR SESSIONAL
MEMBERS
4.35.1 Sessional Members shall submit brief annual reports to their Departments/Schools. These reports shall include a
current curriculum vitae as well as a current teaching dossier as defined in Article 5.50 –
Assessment of a Member’s Performance. At their discretion, Sessional Members may also include material related to their
scholarly or creativity activity, professional development, university governance, outside professional activities, and
service to the community.
4.35.2 Departments/Schools shall make copies of these reports available to the Dean/University Librarian on request.
ARTICLE 4.40 – WITHDRAWAL OF SENIORITY FOR
SESSIONAL MEMBERS
4.40.1 The rights established by the provisions for seniority as described above may be altered or revoked in the event
that the teaching performance of a Sessional
Member is found to be unsatisfactory. Action that may affect the seniority rights of a Sessional Member may be initiated at
the request of the Chair/Director of the Department/School or the Dean/University
Librarian and will normally occur only after an informal investigation establishes reasonable grounds for a formal
procedure. There is an expectation that the Sessional Member will be made aware during the informal stage of an
investigation of the concerns regarding her/his teaching performance and will be given an opportunity to give reasons why
a formal procedure should not be initiated. The
Member will be advised of her/his right to Union representation.
4.40.2 If, after an informal investigation, the Chair/Director of the Department/School and the Dean/University
Librarian are of the view that a formal procedure is warranted, an investigation shall be conducted by the
Departmental/School Council or a specially formed committee that reports back to the Council. The
Union shall be advised that this procedure will be invoked. Department/Schools shall have reasonable flexibility in the
constitution of such a committee. In all cases the investigating body must have at least four (4) members who shall attend
all meetings convened. Membership shall include the
Chair/Director of the Department/School, at least one
(1) other full-time Member of the Department/School, at least one (1) Sessional Member from the
Department/School (if there is one willing to serve), and a nominee of the Sessional Member under investigation (such
nominee must be a full-time or
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 45

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Sessional Member teaching in the
Department/School during the current academic year).
4.40.3 The Member under investigation shall have the right to a full and reasonable statement of the
Department's/School’s reasons for initiating the investigation. The Member shall have the right to examine all evidence
under consideration at least ten
(10) working days before any final determination is made and make counter-representation on it in writing or in person or
both. The Member shall have the right to be accompanied by a colleague.
4.40.4 The investigating committee shall present its findings to the Department/School Council stating the reasons for its
conclusions in reasonable detail. The decision of the Council, which may differ from that of the Committee, shall be
forwarded to the
Dean/University Librarian for action.
4.40.5 The Council's determination may request that the
Member be cautioned or that the Employer's seniority obligation to the Sessional Member be revoked or that the Member
be placed on probation for the duration of one (1) course and that a further determination be made at the conclusion of
that course.
4.40.6 The Dean/University Librarian may accept the recommendation, reject it, or refer it back to the
Department/School for further consideration.
4.40.7 If the Dean/University Librarian decides on revocation of seniority rights, she/he shall advise the
Member and the Union in writing, stating reasons.
The Member shall have the right to request an appeal within ten (10) working days of the receipt of that communication.
The appeal shall be heard by a special FPC/FFPC, which shall consist of the regular
FPC/FFPC, augmented by one (1) Sessional
Lecturer nominated by the Union who will not vote.
The Sessional Lecturer shall have the right to be heard, to be accompanied by a colleague, to examine any evidence with
at least ten (10) days notice and to present counter-representation on it.
The appeal body shall determine the case by simple majority. No further arbitration or appeal shall be open to the Member
or the Employer.
4.40.8 Where an appeal is determined in favour of a
Sessional Member, and where the course has been, or comes to be, scheduled for the following academic
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 46

Collective Agreement 2008-11 year, the Sessional Member, subject to seniority, shall be assigned to, and paid for such a
course or courses. Any other Sessional Member assigned in anticipation of a determination against a Sessional
Member against whom withdrawal of seniority is anticipated shall be entitled to compensation.
4.40.9 Withdrawal of Seniority actions must first be initiated
(as per clause 4.40.1 above) by June 1 in order to be effective for the subsequent academic year.
ARTICLE 4.45 – PHYSICAL AND MENTAL ILLNESS FOR
SESSIONAL MEMBERS
4.45.1 In the event of illness, a Sessional Lecturer shall be granted leave with full pay up to two (2) weeks in each term. If
requested, the Sessional Lecturer shall provide a medical certificate to substantiate the claim. For longer illnesses no
deduction of pay shall be made in cases where no substitute teaching costs accrue to the Employer.
ARTICLE 4.50 – FAMILY RESPONSIBILITY FOR SESSIONAL
MEMBERS
4.50.1 The Ontario Employment Standards Act, 2000 provides specific rights and responsibilities with respect to leaves
related to family responsibilities.
These provisions will apply to Sessional Lecturers.
ARTICLE 4.55 – RATES OF PAY FOR SESSIONAL
MEMBERS
4.55.1 Sessional Lecturers shall be paid as follows for each three (3) credit course which commences after the date
shown below; other courses will be pro- rated as per their credit weighting.
(a) Sessional Members without Establishment
Base Four Four Total pay percent percent rate of
(4%) in (4%) in pay lieu of lieu of vaca- benefits tion
July 1,
2008 $5,288 $212 $212 $5,712
July 1,
2009 $5,595 $224 $224 $6,043
July 1,
2010 $5,875 $235 $235 $6,345
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 47

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(b) Sessional Members with Establishment and
Retirees
Base Four Four Total pay percent percent rate of
(4%) in (4%) in pay lieu of lieu of vaca- benefits tion
July 1,
2008 $5,596 $224 $224 $6,043
July 1,
2009 $5,876 $235 $235 $6,346
July 1,
2010 $6,169 $247 $247 $6,663
Sessional Members are also entitled to the assignment of teaching assistants and/or markers at a level consistent with
assignment of such assistance to full-time Members.
4.55.2 When scheduled Continuing Education Courses may otherwise have to be cancelled, Members may, if they
choose, agree to teach a course for an amount less than the overload stipend. This amount shall be equal to at least the
stipend for the course divided by twelve (12) and multiplied by the number of students enrolled in the course at the time
the course starts. A copy of the agreement shall be sent to the Union at the same time as it is offered to the Member.
4.55.3 The Parties agree that Sessional Members who have establishment for one (1) course, according to Article
4.15 – Appointment and Renewal for Sessional
Members, shall be paid at the establishment rate for any other course they may teach. However, such pay does not
confer establishment for that particular course.
4.55.4 The Parties agree that compensation for Sessional
Members teaching a “teachable” course in the
School of Education or a "didactique" course at l’École des sciences de l’éducation shall be pro-rated at six hundred
dollars ($600) per student up to the maximum of the rate of pay for a Sessional Member with establishment for such a
course.
4.55.5 The Parties agree that the rates of pay for Sessional
Members teaching activity courses in the School of
Human Kinetics shall be the following:
(a) Sessional Members teaching activity courses in the School of Human Kinetics
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 48

Collective Agreement 2008-11 without Establishment
Base Four Four Total pay percent percent rate of
(4%) in (4%) in pay lieu of lieu of vaca- benefits tion
July 1,
2008 $3,100 $124 $124 $3,348
July 1,
2009 $3,200 $128 $128 $3,456
July 1,
2010 $3,300 $132 $132 $3,564
(b) Sessional Members teaching activity courses in the School of Human Kinetics with Establishment
Base Four Four Total pay percent percent rate of
(4%) in (4%) in pay lieu of lieu of vaca- benefits tion
July 1,
2008 $3,300 $132 $132 $3,564
July 1,
2009 $3,400 $136 $136 $3,672
July 1,
2010 $3,500 $140 $140 $3,780
4.55.6 The Parties agree that the rates of pay for Sessional
Members teaching Applied Music courses shall be the following:
(a) Sessional Members teaching Applied Music courses without Establishment
Hourly Four Four Total base per- per- hourly rate cent cent rate of
(4%) in (4%) in pay lieu of lieu of vaca- bene- tion fits
July 1,
2008 $ 52.50 $ 2.10 $ 2.10 $ 56.70
July 1,
2009 $ 55.15 $ 2.21 $ 2.21 $ 59.57
July 1,
2010 $ 57.90 $ 2.32 $ 2.32 $ 62.54
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 49

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(b) Sessional Members teaching Applied Music courses with Establishment
Hourly Four Four Total base per- per- hourly rate cent cent rate of
(4%) in (4%) in pay lieu of lieu of vaca- bene- tion fits
July 1,
2008 $ 55.25 $ 2.21 $ 2.21 $ 59.67
July 1,
2009 $ 58.01 $ 2.32 $ 2.32 $ 62.65
July 1,
2010 $ 60.91 $ 2.44 $ 2.44 $ 65.79
(c) The above rates shall apply to Sessional
Members assigned the duties of sitting on music juries, supervising master classes, and directing ensembles.
Establishment:
On the appointment of a Sessional Member to teach an Applied Music course for a third (3rd) year, the Member shall
have establishment as per Article
4.15 – Appointment and Renewal for Sessional
Members.
Remuneration for Ensemble Directors:
For large ensembles of Laurentian University
(Laurentian University Choir and Laurentian
University Symphonic Wind Ensemble), the total pay will be calculated at three (3) hours per week for twenty-four (24)
weeks based on the above hourly rates.
For all other ensembles, the total pay will be calculated at two (2) hours per week for twenty-four
(24) weeks based on the above hourly rates.
ARTICLE 4.60 – PHYSICAL EDUCATION FACILITIES FOR
SESSIONAL MEMBERS
4.60.1 Sessional Members and their spouse and dependants as defined for full-time Members are eligible for Physical
Education Centre membership and lockerette for the academic year in which they are employed, subject to the payment
of the annual service fee and lockerette rental fee as established by the Division of Physical Education.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 50

Collective Agreement 2008-11
ARTICLE 4.65 – EXEMPTION FROM TUITION FEES FOR
SESSIONAL MEMBERS
4.65.1 Sessional Lecturers shall be entitled to exemption from tuition fees for credit courses taken at
Laurentian University. The exemption available shall equal the number of credits taught by the Sessional
Member. It can be accumulated over a maximum of five (5) years.
ARTICLE 4.70 – PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
EXPENDITURES FOR SESSIONAL MEMBERS
4.70.1 In order to further the objectives of the University, the creation and dissemination of knowledge, the activities of
each Sessional Lecturer shall be supported by professional expenditures. Each
Sessional Lecturer shall receive one hundred and twenty five dollars ($125) for professional development expenditures (in
accordance with
Article 6.45 – Professional Development
Expenditures) for each three (3) credit course taught. Any unused portion of the maximum allowed for professional
development expenditures can be carried forward for two (2) years.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 51

Collective Agreement 2008-11
ACADEMIC CAREER
ARTICLE 5.10 – ACADEMIC QUALIFICATIONS GUIDELINES
5.10.1 For the purpose of this Collective Agreement the following definitions shall apply:
(a) "Doctoral degree" shall mean an earned
Ph.D. or other degree formally recognised as equivalent to an earned Ph.D.
(b) "Relevant experience" shall mean any combination of teaching and scholarly activity as defined in Article 5.15 –
Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of Academics and/or equivalent professional experience.
(c) "Professional designation" shall mean a diploma earned as a result of additional experience/training and qualifying
examinations such as, but not limited to C.A.,
R.I.A., C.G.A., and C.R.E.D.I.F., or others agreed to by the Parties.
(d) When considering librarians, professional service or, where appropriate, library supervision shall be substituted for
"teaching".
In interpreting these guidelines, the following shall apply:
(a) Article 5.10 – Academic Qualifications
Guidelines
(b) Article 5.15 – Rights, Responsibilities and
Duties of Academics
(c) Article 5.50 – Assessment of a Member's
Performance
(d) For those persons appointed prior to July 1,
2002, Article 2.20 of the 1999-2002 Collective
Agreement shall apply.
5.10.2 Academic Qualifications Guidelines for Appointment or
Promotion of Members of the Teaching Faculty.
(a) For the rank of Lecturer
(i) A Master's degree or equivalent degree; or
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 52

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(ii) A Baccalaureate degree and an appropriate professional designation.
(b) For the rank of Assistant Professor
(i) A Doctoral degree; or
(ii) A Master's degree or equivalent and satisfactory performance of the
Member's responsibilities and duties over a five (5) year period as per Article
8.20 – Procedures For the
Award/Denial of a Progress-Through-
The-Ranks Increment and demonstrated evidence of scholarly activity as per Article 5.15 – Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of
Academics; or
(iii) In the Department of Law and Justice, eight (8) years of full-time university education (or the equivalent) during which
time the Member must have obtained a LL.B. and an appropriate
Master’s degree.
(c) For the rank of Associate Professor
(i) A Doctoral degree; and
(ii) Teaching, the quality of which is satisfactory as determined solely by the method of teaching evaluation mandated by
the Collective Agreement; and
(iii) Evidence of scholarly activity (as per
Article 5.15 – Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of Academics) that is of good quality; and
(iv) At the time the promotion to Associate becomes effective, at least five (5) years of full-time teaching and/or research
in a university or an institution of equivalent level or at least five (5) years of professional experience judged to be relevant
for teaching at the university level.
(v) The requirement for scholarly activity as stipulated under (iii) may be replaced in exceptional cases by a consistently
demonstrated quality of teaching and tutorial activity that clearly indicates outstanding qualities as a teacher as
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 53

Collective Agreement 2008-11 established by whatever is the generally accepted method of evaluation.
(d) For the rank of Full Professor
(i) A Doctoral degree; and
(ii) Teaching, the quality of which is satisfactory as determined solely by the method of teaching evaluation mandated by
the Collective Agreement; and
(iii) Shown evidence of scholarly activity
(per Article 5.15 – Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of
Academics) throughout the Member’s career and after her/his promotion to
Associate Professor that ranks as a recognised contribution to the scholarly field or professional activity concerned.
This work must be judged by four (4) external referees, who shall normally be
Full Professors in an academic institution, and at least two (2) of these referees may be nominated by the applicant; and
(iv) Normally, at the time that the promotion to Full Professor becomes effective, at least ten (10) years of full-time
teaching and/or research in a university or in an institution of equivalent level, or has accumulated at least ten (10) years
of professional experience judged to be relevant for teaching at the University level;
Alternative to the requirements for promotion to
Full Professor:
The requirement for scholarly activity stipulated under (iii) may be replaced in extraordinary circumstances by a
requirement that the
Member has consistently shown clearly outstanding qualities as a teacher and has scholarly activity of good quality.
5.10.3 Academic Qualifications Guidelines for Appointment or
Promotion of Professional Librarians and Archivists.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 54

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(a) For the rank of General Librarian or General
Archivist
(i) A Master's degree, in Library or Archival
Studies.
(b) For the rank of Assistant Librarian or Assistant
Archivist
(i) A Doctoral degree, it being understood that unless this Doctoral degree is in the field of Library Science or Archival
Studies, it shall be accompanied by a
Master's degree or equivalent qualifications in Library Science or
Archival Studies; or
(ii) A Master's degree in Library Science or
Archival Studies and professional service and library or archival supervisory skills relevant to academic librarianship or
archival management, the quality of which is established as clearly satisfactory by whatever is the generally accepted
method of evaluation over a period of four (4) years; and demonstrated evidence of scholarly activity as per Article 5.15 –
Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of
Academics.
(c) For the rank of Associate Librarian or
Associate Archivist
(i) An appropriate Doctoral degree, it being understood that unless this
Doctoral degree is in the field of Library
Science or Archival Studies, it shall be accompanied by a Master's degree or equivalent qualifications in Library
Science or Archival Studies; or
In exceptional cases, a Master's degree in Library Science or Archival Studies and professional service and library or
archival supervisory skills relevant to academic librarianship or archival management, the quality of which is established
as clearly satisfactory by whatever is the generally accepted method of evaluation over a period of four (4) years; and
demonstrated evidence of scholarly activity as per
Article 5.15 – Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of Academics since last promotion; and
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 55

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(ii) At the time the promotion to Associate becomes effective, at least five (5) years of full-time professional service
relevant to academic librarianship or archival management.
(d) For the rank of Full Librarian or Full Archivist
(i) An appropriate Doctoral degree, it being understood that unless this
Doctoral degree is in the field of Library
Science or Archival Studies, it shall be accompanied by a Master's degree or equivalent qualifications in Library
Science or Archival Studies; or
In exceptional cases, a Master's degree in Library Science or Archival Studies and professional service and library or
archival supervisory skills relevant to academic librarianship or archival management, the quality of which is established
as clearly satisfactory by whatever is the generally accepted method of evaluation over a period of four (4) years; and
demonstrated evidence of scholarly activity as per
Article 5.15 – Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of Academics since last promotion; and
(ii) Have demonstrated outstanding professional performance and, in addition, have shown evidence of on-going scholarly
activity of good quality (as per Article 5.15 – Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of
Academics) throughout the Member’s career and after her/his promotion to
Associate Librarian or Associate
Archivist. This work must be judged by four (4) external referees, two (2) of whom may be nominated by the applicant;
and
(iii) Have normally accumulated, at the time the promotion to Full Librarian or Full
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 56

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Archivist becomes effective, at least ten
(10) years of full-time professional service relevant to academic librarianship or archival management.
5.10.4 Bilingualism
(a) The Employer may, in consultation with the
Departments/Schools:
(i) Stipulate in advertising for and in appointing Members, that a bilingual applicant is preferred or required;
(ii) Require the appointment of applicants capable of working in either or both of the official languages in order to improve
the balance between courses offered in English and courses offered in French within any
Department/School or Faculty;
(iii) Require the appointment of applicants capable of working in either or both of the official languages in the Library;
(iv) Consider bilingualism as a desired qualification for those Members who are selected to take on specific
responsibilities.
(b) Letters of appointment shall clearly indicate any bilingual requirements which are to be a condition of being granted
tenure and any assistance that the Employer might agree to provide to the Members for them to meet these requirements.
(c) A Member's performance in both French and
English will be taken into consideration in such matters as promotion and tenure.
5.10.5 A Member who has consistently demonstrated clearly outstanding performance in the areas of
teaching/professional librarianship, research, and/or university governance and administrative duties may, in extraordinary
circumstances, be promoted to the next rank without fulfilling the years of experience criterion as stipulated in paragraphs
5.10.2 (b), (c) and
(d) and paragraphs 5.10.3 (b), (c) and (d) above. The burden of proof of outstanding performance rests with the applicant.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 57

Collective Agreement 2008-11
ARTICLE 5.15 – RIGHTS, RESPONSIBILITIES AND DUTIES
OF ACADEMICS
5.15.1 The full-time Members of the Bargaining Unit have rights, duties and responsibilities which derive from their
positions as teachers/professional librarians and scholars working within the University community, and which reflect the
reasonable expectations of the
Members, the University community and the contractual expectations of the Employer. In this
Article, the term Members refers to full-time Members unless otherwise specified.
5.15.2 Members have the right to engage in the following activities:
Priority One –
A) Teaching / Professional Librarianship /
Archives Management
B) Scholarly Activity
Priority Two –
C) University Governance and Administrative
Duties
Priority Three –
D) Outside Professional Activities
E) Service to the Community
Priority Four –
F) Other Paid Activity (consistent with clause
5.15.38)
5.15.3 Members have responsibilities relating to items A), B) and C) and are expected to participate actively in items A),
B) and C), although not necessarily in all three (3) in any one (1) given year. A Member's responsibilities related to item A)
shall consist of those teaching or library duties which are assigned by the
Dean/University Librarian as per Article 5.40 –
Academic Workload. A Member's responsibilities related to items B) and C) are inherent in a Member's status as an
academic and thus flow naturally therefrom. Certain specific duties related to item B) and C) may also be assigned by the
Dean/University
Librarian on an ad hoc basis in order to ensure a good and proper functioning of the University. A Member's
responsibilities relating to item D), E) and F) are
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 58

Collective Agreement 2008-11 undertaken voluntarily by the Member.
5.15.4 Some specific features of academic responsibilities are set out in the following sections:
Priority One –
A) Part One - Teaching
5.15.5 Members have an obligation to develop and maintain their scholarly competence and effectiveness as teachers
within the area of their expertise. They shall inform their students regarding their methods of evaluation, which have been
approved by the
Department/School and the Dean, consistent with
Senate policies. They shall also inform their students regarding their instructional methods and seek approval of the
Department/School and of the Dean for substantial changes in instructional methods involving significant increases in
costs or alterations in the established policy of the Department/School, e.g. conversion of a lecture course to a reading
course.
5.15.6 While it is recognized that whenever possible there shall be adequate consultation with the Member and the
Department/School as to the assignment of teaching duties, once such teaching duties have been assigned in a fair and
equitable manner by the Dean, it is the responsibility of the Member to teach the assigned courses to students registered
in them at the time and place designated by the Dean in a manner which reflects the area of the content of the course
approved by the Department/School consistent with the University calendar. A Member shall not delegate her/his teaching
duties to another person, the occasional guest lecture excepted. Assignment of teaching duties shall be consistent with
Article 5.40 –
Academic Workload. Teaching responsibilities include being available for reasonable consultation with students at their
teaching locale subject to Article 5.40
– Academic Workload.
5.15.7 A Member shall not be required to co-teach a course without the Member’s consent.
5.15.8 Members shall comply with all properly established regulations of the University, which are not at variance with this
Collective Agreement. Members shall accept responsibility for participation in the effective operation of the University,
including responsibilities for academic counselling, registration, and the supervision of examinations as appropriately
assigned
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 59

Collective Agreement 2008-11 by the Department/School, the Dean or the Registrar's office consistent with Senate policy.
During examinations, only the head invigilator shall be a faculty Member. The head invigilator shall be selected randomly
from the LUFA full-time faculty membership and the names of those who serve shall be removed from the pool of potential
head invigilators until all remaining Members have served. The names of those Members not scheduling any of their final
examinations through the Registrar’s Office will not be included in the pool for the examination period concerned.
5.15.9 It is the responsibility of Members to deal ethically and fairly with students and their academic colleagues in relation
to their own teaching. Ethical and fair dealing with students and colleagues includes respecting the
Laurentian Policy on A Respectful Workplace and
Learning Environment. It is also the responsibility of
Members to foster a free exchange of ideas including a discussion of differing views, to avoid discrimination, to respect
the principles of confidentiality in a manner consistent with the performance of their academic role, and to acknowledge
their indebtedness to students and their academic colleagues in relation to their own teaching.
5.15.10 Each Member shall have freedom of discussion.
However, in the exercise of this freedom in the classroom, reasonable restraint shall be used in introducing matters
unrelated to her/his subject or discipline.
5.15.11 Members shall be free to organise and to structure classroom and laboratory activities and to adopt reasonable
means to maintain a learning environment, which is both productive and orderly. They shall have the right to rule on the
use by students of electronic devices such as recording devices, calculating devices, and lap-top computers in the
classroom, laboratory or learning situation. Notwithstanding
Members right to rule, students designated by the
Special Needs Office shall have access to electronic devices as determined by the Special Needs Office.
Members shall be informed of any such authorizations and, if necessary, can consult with the Special Needs
Office for possible alterations.
5.15.12 Members shall not alter or cancel scheduled instruction except with prior permission of the
Chair/Director in any but exceptional circumstances.
Such permission shall not be unreasonably refused.
Both Parties agree that every reasonable effort will be made to notify the students affected. Timetable changes of a
permanent nature require the prior permission of the Dean. Absences are governed by
Article 7.20 – Absence - General.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 60

Collective Agreement 2008-11
5.15.13 Members shall have fourteen (14) calendar days following the final exam to submit their final grades or fourteen
(14) calendar days following the last class for those courses that do not hold final exams.
A) Part Two - Professional Librarianship /
Archives Management
5.15.14 Members have an obligation to develop and to maintain their scholarly competence and effectiveness as
librarians within the area of their expertise.
5.15.15 While it is recognised that whenever possible there shall be adequate consultation between the Member and the
University Librarian as to the assignment of duties, once such duties have been assigned in a fair and equitable manner
by the University Librarian, it is the responsibility of the Members to perform their duties at the time and place designated
by the
University Librarian. Assignment of professional library
/ archives management duties shall be consistent with
Article 5.40 – Academic Workload.
5.15.16 It is the responsibility of Members to deal ethically and fairly with those to whom they render professional service.
Ethical and fair dealing with clients and colleagues includes respecting the Laurentian Policy on A Respectful Workplace
and Learning
Environment. It is also the responsibility of Members to foster a free exchange of ideas, to avoid discrimination, to respect
the principles of confidentiality in a manner consistent with the performance of their academic role, and to acknowledge
their indebtedness to their academic colleagues in relation to their own professional activities.
5.15.17 Members shall have the right and responsibility to adopt reasonable means to maintain an orderly and productive
learning environment in the library / archives.
5.15.18 Members, if involved in scheduled work-related activities, shall not alter or cancel such scheduled activities except
with prior permission of the University
Librarian in any but exceptional circumstances. Such permission shall not be unreasonably refused. Both
Parties agree that every reasonable effort will be made to notify the person affected. Absences are governed by Article
7.20 – Absence - General.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 61

Collective Agreement 2008-11
B) Scholarly Activity
5.15.19 Members shall have the right and responsibility to devote a reasonable proportion of their time to scholarly
activity.
5.15.20 It is understood that for the purposes of this Collective
Agreement the term "scholarly activity" means:
(a) Research directed towards a contribution to knowledge, and the dissemination of its results; and/or
(b) Participation in those academic activities that contribute to the enhancement, creation and dissemination of
knowledge; and/or
(c) Creative and professional activities which contribute to one's discipline.
5.15.21 Scholarly activity may involve, although not necessarily be limited to the following, but in each case the Member
must demonstrate that the activity is of good quality and is consistent with the contribution to knowledge described in
clause 5.15.2 above. It is understood that this list does not imply an order of priority. It is also understood that the
following forms of scholarly activity are not necessarily to be given equal weight and application for each discipline when a
Member is being evaluated for an annual increment, merit increment, tenure or promotion. In such evaluations, where the
evidence does not rest on externally reviewed publications, other evidence of scholarly activity must be considered, but
the burden of proof rests upon the applicant.
(a) The writing or editing and publication of books, textbooks, journals and of articles.
(b) The earning of additional appropriate academic and/or professional qualifications.
(c) Research carried out on research contracts.
(d) The writing of case studies.
(e) The development of teaching/library materials, of an innovative sort which have a wider application than the Member's
own teaching/library activities.
(f) The compilation and publication of scholarly bibliographies, or literary work.
(g) The translation and publication of scholarly or literary work.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 62

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(h) Literary and artistic works, including recordings and public performances.
(i) Demonstrated leadership in the area of professional education, including workshops.
(j) Creative application of existing knowledge through such activities as consulting or workshops.
5.15.22 The Parties agree that scholarly activity does not normally include research directly related to the immediate and
normal preparation for teaching activity.
5.15.23 Where appropriate in their published work, the
Members shall indicate affiliation with the University and acknowledge their indebtedness to students and their academic
colleagues in relation to their own research.
5.15.24 The Parties encourage all Members of the Bargaining
Unit to deposit one (1) signed copy of their published material in the University Library. The University agrees to pay for
reasonable expenses incurred by a
Member in making such material available to the
Library.
5.15.25 Members have the right to participate in the activities of professional or learned societies and the like, providing
such activities do not conflict with the reasonable fulfilment of assigned duties.
Priority Two –
C) University Governance and Administrative
Duties
5.15.26 To the extent consistent with their teaching/library and scholarly responsibilities, Members shall contribute to the
governance of the University through membership on appropriate bodies. It is understood that for the purposes of this
Article, service to the Union will be considered equivalent to service on
Department/School or Senate Committees.
5.15.27 While exercising university governance and administrative responsibilities, Members shall deal ethically with other
university employees and students so that objectivity, fairness, and absence of discrimination are maintained in all
deliberations including assessment of performance of any employee or student. Members shall not infringe on the
academic freedom of academic colleagues or
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 63

Collective Agreement 2008-11 students or breach confidentiality in this regard.
5.15.28 In order to ensure equality of opportunity to participate in university governance, the Employer agrees to circulate
notice of openings on all university bodies above the Department / School / Library level to eligible Members at least two
(2) weeks prior to the time that the vacancies must be filled. As a university body, the Union agrees to circulate notice of
vacancies, at least two (2) weeks prior to the time that these vacancies must be filled.
5.15.29 Because bilingualism is necessary for effective participation in university governance, the Parties agree that for
Members on probationary appointment, formal language training as per Article
3.30 – Bilingualism shall constitute activities of
“University Governance and Administrative Duties” as per this Article.
Priority Three –
D) Outside Professional Activities
5.15.30 The Parties encourage Members to participate in outside professional activities.
5.15.31 The scope and nature of any professional activities of a substantial nature, whether paid or unpaid shall be
reported in writing to the Dean/University Librarian as part of the annual report of Members.
Notwithstanding the above, contractual activities that would involve Members spending a total of more than one half (1/2)
day a week on a regular basis between
Monday and Friday during a term in which they teach or perform professional library duties shall be reported in writing to
the Dean/University Librarian prior to the signing of the contract or beginning of the work. The
Dean/University Librarian may require the Members not to undertake an activity or to moderate such an activity on the
grounds that the time involved would or does interfere with the Member's academic obligations as defined in this
Collective Agreement. A reasonable period of time shall be allowed for the Members to comply. The appropriateness of
the decisions of the
Dean/University Librarian on these matters is subject to grievance and arbitration.
5.15.32 When undertaking outside professional activities,
Members retain the rights and responsibilities associated with academic freedom.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 64

Collective Agreement 2008-11
5.15.33 When a Member's outside professional activities involve the use of the University's facilities, supplies or services,
permission for their use shall be approved in writing or through email by the appropriate University
Administrator. Such permission shall not be unreasonably refused. These services shall normally be paid for at the
prevailing internal University user rate, unless the University Administrator agrees in writing to waive all or part of the
fee(s).
E) Service to the Community
5.15.34 The Parties encourage Members to offer service to the community.
5.15.35 The rights and responsibilities of Members who offer service to the community shall be the same as for those
Members who participate in outside professional activities, as modified by clause 5.15.36 below.
5.15.36 When a Member's service to the community involves the use of the University's facilities, supplies or services,
permission for their use shall be approved in writing or through email by the appropriate University
Administrator. Such permission shall not be unreasonably refused. These services shall normally be paid for at the
prevailing external University user rate, unless the University Administrator agrees in writing to waive all or part of the
fee(s).
Priority Four –
F) Other Paid Activity
5.15.37 Faculty Members have the right to engage in other paid activity
5.15.38 All such activities shall be governed by clause 5.15.31 above, except the annual report where such reporting shall
be optional to the Member.
ARTICLE 5.20 – APPOINTMENT AND RENEWAL
Appointment of Full-time Members of the Bargaining Unit–
5.20.1 New appointments that fall within the Bargaining Unit shall normally be advertised:
(a) Within the University and
(b) Outside the University
In suitable national and discipline publications such as University Affairs, CAUT Bulletin and other publications that may
be especially directed to
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 65

Collective Agreement 2008-11 professionals who belong to any of the four (4) designated employment equity groups.
Advertisements shall contain a clause stating that
Laurentian University is committed to employment equity.
5.20.2 (a) Appointments shall be made by the Vice-
President, Academic on behalf of the
Employer and on the recommendation of the
Dean/University Librarian and the written recommendation of the majority of the
Members of the Department/School concerned after scheduled, minuted meeting(s) with Department/School Members.
Individual Members may choose to vote in person, by email or by facsimile. Proxy voting is not permitted.
(b) The letter of appointment shall indicate the
Department/School to which the Member will be assigned.
(c) In the event that an appointee has duties and responsibilities in more than one
Department/School or program, then one
Department/School shall be declared to be the
Member's Department/School. Wherever in this Collective Agreement recommendations or evaluations of a Member's
performance are required from a Department/School, in addition to the recommendation or evaluation from the assigned
Department/School, the other
Department(s)/School(s) or program(s) shall also submit their recommendation or evaluation; these recommendations
shall carry a weight approximately proportional to the duties and responsibilities of the Member in each
program/Department/School.
(d) Advertisements for all vacant positions shall refer to the Union website where applicants can access the Collective
Agreement.
5.20.3 If a number of applicants have been judged to be substantially equal in qualifications and appropriateness of
academic specialization, priority shall be given to Canadian citizens, permanent residents, and persons on minister's
permits.
5.20.4 (a) Where selection has to take place among equally qualified applicants, relevant criteria for appointment shall
include teaching/professional, scholarly potential and employment equity goals.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 66

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(b) In disciplines where it is difficult to attract qualified faculty, and/or in order to achieve employment equity goals, the
Employer and the Union will work together to devise and implement innovative appointment arrangements in order to
combine appointments with the opportunity to complete Doctoral degrees.
(c) All Department/School search committees for new faculty appointments shall include at least one (1) woman. Where
the
Department/School has no women Members, the Dean/University Librarian, in consultation with the Department/School,
shall appoint a woman Member from another
Department/School to the search committee.
(d) Search committees shall be proactive in the recruitment of applicants from the four (4) employment equity groups
outlined in Article
5.25 – Employment Equity. If the tentative short list of applicants does not include at least one (1) member of an equity
group, the search committee shall submit an explanation. If the
Dean/University Librarian is not satisfied with the explanation, the Dean/University Librarian may change the short list. If
the short list contains fewer than three (3) names, this change can only be an additional name.
Alternatively, the Dean/University Librarian shall work together with the
Department/School to substitute one (1) of the short-listed names.
5.20.5 Appointments shall be made only to the ranks referred to in this Collective Agreement, viz, Lecturer,
Assistant Professor, Associate Professor, Full
Professor, and the corresponding library ranks
(General Librarian/Archivist, Assistant
Librarian/Archivist, Associate Librarian/Archivist, Full
Librarian/Archivist).
5.20.6 Appointments shall be made only to the status categories referred to in this Collective Agreement, viz, limited term,
probationary and tenured. From time to time the Parties may agree to other categories.
5.20.7 Candidates from within the Bargaining Unit shall be entitled to consideration for all advertised posts.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 67

Collective Agreement 2008-11
5.20.8 All letters of appointment shall normally be signed no later than the start of a teaching term in which a
Member must first teach, i.e. by September 1, January
1 and May 1. Letters of appointment shall follow the format outlined in Appendix O – Standard Letter of
Employment and Offer of Employment. No letter of appointment shall contain any conditions not consistent with this
Collective Agreement. A copy of the letter of appointment, or revisions thereof, shall be forwarded to the Union at the
same time as the original is sent to the applicant. The applicant’s telephone/fax numbers and email address, as well as
any other means of contacting the applicant will be included if the applicant has provided them.
5.20.9 Upon appointment new Members shall provide the
Vice-President, Academic copies of their birth certificate, or equivalent document, and certified copies of their academic
degrees and, if required for the position, their professional qualifications.
Limited Term Appointments –
5.20.10 Limited Term appointments are appointments that carry no implication of renewal or continuation beyond the
stated term and no implication that the appointee shall be considered for tenure. Limited term appointees must be
assigned to an academic
Department/School and shall be considered
Members unless excluded by Article 2.15 –
Recognition of the Bargaining Unit. Limited term appointments are utilised:
(a) To bring distinguished visitors to the
University.
(b) For exchange appointments.
(c) To provide replacements for Members on leave.
(d) To respond to specific academic needs which the Employer, for academic and/or budgetary reasons, does not wish to
result in an appointment in the probationary stream. This shall be done in consultation with the Union who shall not
unreasonably withhold its agreement.
(e) For appointments to programs with provisional funding or of a trial nature.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 68

Collective Agreement 2008-11
5.20.11 Where appointments must be made urgently, the
Vice-President, Academic may, with the agreement of the Parties, authorise exceptions to the procedures in clauses
5.20.1 and 5.20.4 above.
Such agreement shall not be unreasonably withheld.
5.20.12 The Vice-President, Academic has the discretion, after consultation with the Department/School and the
Dean/University Librarian, to re-appoint the holder of a term appointment without further advertisement. Should the
Employer choose to re- advertise the post, the incumbent may apply, but retains no right of preference over other
acceptable applicants. The normal procedures for appointment will apply.
5.20.13 Term appointees may not apply for promotion in the final year of their term appointment, unless they had been
prevented from applying in the year immediately preceding. A term appointee reappointed to a further term appointment
or a term appointee reappointed to a probationary position shall be reappointed to the same rank that she/he held in the
previous appointment. A Member so reappointed may, subsequent to reappointment, also apply for a promotion as per
Article 5.65 – Promotion
Procedures. If the Member is granted a promotion, the said promotion shall be retroactive to the date of the Member's
reappointment.
5.20.14 Term appointments shall be limited to a total of three
(3) years, except by agreement of the Parties. In cases where the limited term appointment is a replacement for an
academic administrator, the appointment may be for a term up to five (5) years.
The initial term may be for less than a full academic year, but reappointment shall normally be for a full twelve (12) month
period. The term limits (three (3) or five (5)) shall apply whether or not the term appointments are consecutive or
intermittent.
5.20.15 Non-renewal of term appointments shall not be subject to grievance.
5.20.16 For the duration of this Collective Agreement, the
Employer agrees that the total number of limited term appointments will not exceed fifteen percent
(15%) of the total number of faculty members except with the agreement of the Parties.
Probationary Appointments/Tenure Appointments –
5.20.17 Probationary appointments are defined as appointments lasting up to a maximum of five (5) years, during which
time the Employer and the
Employee are afforded an opportunity for mutual appraisal.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 69

Collective Agreement 2008-11
5.20.18 Probation does not imply that the Employer will grant tenure at the end of the probationary period; it does imply
that the Employer will give serious consideration to awarding tenure.
5.20.19 Should a Member holding a term appointment wish to apply for a probationary appointment, the
Member's application shall be considered in the normal way along with all other applications for the position. Should such
a Member be appointed to the probationary position, at the Member’s discretion, the
Member’s probationary period may be reduced by up to the number of years that the Member has served in limited term
appointment(s) to a maximum of three
(3) years.
5.20.20 Faculty appointed on probation will serve a maximum probationary period based on the academic rank at which
the appointment is made.
Faculty appointed at the rank of Lecturer/General
Librarian or Assistant Professor/Librarian will serve a five (5) year probationary period. Faculty appointed at the rank of
Associate Professor/Librarian and Full
Professor/Librarian will serve a three (3) year probationary period. Where a Member is appointed at the rank of Full
Professor/Librarian the Employer may grant tenure on appointment. Under exceptional circumstances and upon
recommendation of both the Department/School and the Vice-President,
Academic, where a Member is appointed at the rank of Associate Professor/Librarian the University may grant tenure on
appointment, provided that the new
Member is tenured at another recognised university.
5.20.21 An Associate Professor/Librarian or Full
Professor/Librarian who has at least three (3) years service to the University, who has applied for a probationary
appointment, shall be considered for such an appointment on the basis of the criteria listed in Article 5.60 – Tenure
Evaluation
Procedures. Should such a Member be appointed to the position, it shall be a final probationary appointment of one (1)
year with tenure evaluation to begin by September 30 of that year.
5.20.22 In the case of persons appointed at the rank of
Lecturer/General Librarian and Assistant
Professor/Librarian, the initial probationary appointment shall be for a period of three (3) years.
(a) In their initial letter of appointment by the
Vice-President, Academic and in their annual evaluation letters by the Deans/University
Librarian, all Members on initial probationary contract shall be notified that they shall begin to undergo a renewal
evaluation by the
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 70

Collective Agreement 2008-11
FPC/FFPC/LPC no later than September 30 of the final year in their initial probationary contract.
(b) Subject to satisfactory performance as outlined in paragraph 5.20.22 (c) below, the initial probationary appointment will
be followed by a further two (2) year probationary appointment with a tenure evaluation to take place in the final year of
that second appointment or as per Article 5.60 – Tenure
Evaluation Procedures.
(c) The decision whether or not to offer a second two (2) year probationary appointment shall be reached on the basis of a
judgement of satisfactory performance under procedures set out under Article 5.45 – Annual Report for
Members, Article 5.60 – Tenure Evaluation
Procedures and Article 8.20 – Procedures for the Award/Denial for a Progress-Through-the-
Ranks Increment;
(d) In assessing the applicant’s progress toward meeting the requirements for tenure outlined in paragraphs 5.60.3 (d)
and (e) of Article
5.60 – Tenure Evaluation Procedures, the
FPC/FFPC/LPC shall comment on each aspect of these criteria. The FPC/FFPC/LPC should also comment on the rate of
progress shown during the initial probationary period. If the performance is found unsatisfactory the
FPC/FFPC/LPC may recommend that the applicant not be offered a final probationary appointment.
5.20.23 In the case of persons appointed at the rank of
Associate Professor/Librarian and Full
Professor/Librarian, the initial appointment shall be a three (3) year probationary appointment with a tenure evaluation to
take place in the final year of the appointment, except as modified in clause 5.20.20 above.
5.20.24 The tenure evaluation is to be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in Article
5.60 – Tenure Evaluation Procedures, and will result in a decision either to award tenure or to allow the appointment to
lapse.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 71

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Adjunct Appointments –
5.20.25 When it is appropriate for scholarly or professional reasons, a person may be appointed to a position as
Adjunct Professor by the Vice-President, Academic upon recommendation by Departments/Schools and
Deans for a period with defined privileges and voluntary responsibilities in scholarly activity. Each month at Senate, the
Vice-President, Academic shall table as a separate Information item a list of any newly appointed Adjunct faculty
members including their names, Department/School affiliations, periods of appointment along with a justification for each
appointment, highest degree held, year obtained, current institution and rank (position), at that institution. All Adjunct
faculty members shall also be included in the faculty listing on Department/School websites.
5.20.26 Adjunct appointments shall also become Sessional
Members if they carry any of the duties consistent with this Collective Agreement. Such Members shall be paid for thesis
supervision as per Article 5.40 –
Academic Workload. However, Adjunct faculty members may collaborate in scholarly activities with
Members without becoming Sessional Members.
5.20.27 There shall be no new appointments to the currently designated Affiliate Professor category. Professors currently
designated as Affiliate Professors are eligible to be transferred to the Adjunct status at the expiry of their current term of
appointment.
Cross Appointments –
5.20.28 When it is appropriate for academic teaching/scholarly or professional reasons, Members may be appointed to
more than one (1)
Department/School of the University such that the salary of the Member is charged to one (1) fiscal
Department/School, but she/he is named to another
Department/School in which she/he has a sustained academic teaching/scholarly or professional interest.
Such appointments shall be called cross appointments.
5.20.29 A cross appointment shall only be made with the consent of the Members of all Departments/Schools concerned.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 72

Collective Agreement 2008-11
5.20.30 A cross appointment shall be made by the Employer for a fixed period not exceeding five (5) years, and may be
renewed or altered with the consent of the
Member and on the recommendations of the
Department(s)/School(s) concerned. The termination or alteration of a cross appointment, except for cause, shall not in
itself jeopardize the Member's appointment with the University in the
Department/School of primary responsibility, as specified in clause 5.20.33 below. Notwithstanding any of the foregoing, a
cross appointment will terminate upon the termination of the appointment in the Department/School of primary
responsibility as specified in clause 5.20.33 below.
5.20.31 The sources and level of administrative and academic teaching/scholarly support available to the
Member with a cross appointment shall be mutually agreed by the Member and the Department/School concerned and
shall be confirmed in writing by the
Chair/Director. In the event that the cross-appointed
Member is recommended by either
Department/School to teach in the
Department/School to which she/he has been cross appointed, the teaching assignment will be issued by the primary
Dean of the Member and only with the agreement of the other Dean (if applicable) and after consultation with both
Chair(s)/Director(s).
5.20.32 In the case of a cross appointment, the assessment procedures and criteria to be used by the cross- appointed
Department/School in considering the
Member for renewal, tenure and promotion shall be those of the Department/School of primary responsibility as specified
in paragraphs 5.50.6 (b),
5.50.6 (c), 5.50.6 (d), 5.50.6(e), 5.50.6 (f), 5.50.6 (g) and 5.50.6 (i) of Article 5.50 – Assessment of a
Member’s Performance only and are subject to clause 5.20.33 below.
5.20.33 The Chair/Director and the eligible Members of the cross-appointed Departments/Schools shall be consulted
formally during the renewal, tenure and promotion process. This consultation shall not involve examination of the
academic dossier but shall be limited to a written assessment concerning the contributions the applicant has made to the
cross-appointed Department/School in the areas outlined in Article 5.15 – Rights, Responsibilities and
Duties of Academics and shall be weighed by the
FPC/FFPC/LPC pursuant to paragraph 5.50.6 (k) of
Article 5.50 – Assessment of a Member’s
Performance. Members who are eligible to vote and participate in the assessment of applications shall do so in their own
Department/School of primary responsibility. In cases where an eligible Member of the applicants cross-appointed
Department/School acts as an assessor in the applicant’s
Department/School of primary responsibility pursuant
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 73

Collective Agreement 2008-11 to paragraph 5.50.6 (j) of Article 5.50 – Assessment of a Member’s Performance, the
eligible Member shall not be permitted to vote or participate in the assessment of the applicant by the applicant’s cross-
appointed Department/School given that in no case shall an eligible Member be permitted to vote and participate in the
assessment in more than one instance.
5.20.34 The letter of cross appointment shall state the privileges and sharing, if any, of duties and responsibilities between
or among
Departments/Schools.
5.20.35 Members holding a cross appointment shall be eligible to attend meetings of all
Departments/Schools to which they are appointed, but may vote, be elected to or appointed to committees only in their
Academic
Department/School of primary responsibility.
5.20.36 Qualified persons from the Northern Ontario School of Medicine may be cross-appointed to
Departments/Schools within Laurentian University subject to the approval of the Department/School.
Such persons shall be Members of the Union if they carry any of the duties consistent with this Collective
Agreement. Such Members shall be paid for thesis supervision according to Article 5.40 – Academic
Workload.
Spousal Hiring Appointments –
5.20.37 When an applicant has been recommended by a
Department/School for a probationary or tenured appointment and has a spouse or partner who may be qualified for an
academic position, a
Department/School appropriate to the discipline of the spouse or partner may recommend a one (1) to three (3) year term
appointment without advertising under the following conditions:
(a) The Vice-President, Academic has confirmed the availability of a position within the
Department/School in question;
(b) The Chair/Director has made available an application file for viewing by all Members of that Department/School and
has arranged interviews and open meetings with the applicant and the Members in the
Department/School, on campus or through
Telecommunications Technology;
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 74

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(c) A majority of the full-time Members of the
Department/School by vote have approved of the recommendation, including the term of the appointment when
applicable;
(d) The appointment has been approved by the
Vice President, Academic after review of the application file and the Department/School recommendation;
(e) The decision of the Vice-President, Academic is not subject to grievance.
5.20.38 Notwithstanding the provisions of clause 5.20.14 above, an appointment made under the provisions may be
extended, subject to Department/School approval, for a period of up to five (5) years in total.
5.20.39 At any time, the total number of spousal appointments shall not exceed ten (10).
Appointments and Accreditations to the Faculty of
Graduate Studies –
5.20.40 All Members with a PhD or equivalent qualification are eligible to teach graduate courses or conjoint
graduate-senior undergraduate courses. However, to supervise graduate theses Members must be appointed to the
Faculty of Graduate Studies.
Members may apply at any time to the Dean of
Graduate Studies for appointment to the Faculty of
Graduate Studies. The requirements for appointment shall be publicly available to all
Members. All applications for appointment will be evaluated in accordance with the Policy of the
Council of the Faculty of Graduate Studies.
ARTICLE 5.25 – EMPLOYMENT EQUITY
5.25.1 The Parties support the principle of employment equity as defined by Provincial and Federal Laws and the
Senate/Board of Governors approved Policy on
Employment Equity.
5.25.2 Employment Equity
(a) The Parties pledge themselves to work to increase the proportion of faculty Members who are members of the four (4)
designated employment equity groups (women, native people, persons with disabilities and members of visible minorities)
to an equitable level in each discipline.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 75

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(b) To determine an equitable proportion of members of the four (4) designated employment equity groups for each
discipline, the Parties shall consider among other factors the number of Doctoral applicants in Canadian universities as
revealed by Statistics Canada data.
5.25.3 The Vice-President, Academic shall support employment equity by:
(a) promoting awareness of the University’s commitment to non-discrimination and to the promotion of equity in the
employment status of Members in the designated employment equity groups;
(b) ensuring proper training on equitable employment practices for all
Departments/Schools hiring new members;
(c) providing annual reports to the Employer and the Union on:
(i) the total number of applicants and the number of self-identified applicants by employment equity group for each vacant
position for which a search has been conducted,
(ii) the composition by employment equity group of the Members in each
Department/School, by rank and status of appointment, as voluntarily reported by Members,
(iii) the percentage of employment equity groups by discipline in graduate degree programs in Canada, if available,
(iv) other matters deemed necessary to monitor the effectiveness of this
Article.
5.25.4 In order to increase awareness of the University’s employment equity goals and to support non- discriminatory
interview and hiring practices, full-time
Members shall make every reasonable effort to attend the training sessions on equitable employment practices offered by
the University for their respective Department/School.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 76

Collective Agreement 2008-11
ARTICLE 5.30 – ABORIGINAL EQUITY INITIATIVE
5.30.1 Following from the 2007 Report of the Aboriginal
Equity Initiative Committee mandated by the 2005-08
Collective Agreement, the Employer and the Union agree that a series of active measures are required to appoint a larger
number of qualified Aboriginal professors and librarians at Laurentian University, particularly outside Aboriginal-specific
programs.
5.30.2 The Employer agrees to develop a “grow-our-own” program to recruit and appoint Aboriginal professors and
librarians to probationary appointments, who, on the condition of agreeing to work at Laurentian as professors/librarians
for a minimum of three (3) years, shall be supported in completing the academic qualifications needed for tenure (per
Article 5.10 – Academic Qualifications Guidelines).
The details of the program are to be agreed to by the
Employer and the Union in consultation with the
Office of Academic Native Affairs. Each September, the Employer shall canvas Departments/Schools with upcoming
probationary appointment vacancies, and assuming the Department’s/School’s agreement to participate in this program,
shall make every reasonable effort to appoint at least two (2)
Aboriginal candidates under the program every year beginning July 1, 2009.
ARTICLE 5.35 – NEWLY HIRED MEMBERS
5.35.1 In the year the Collective Agreement is being negotiated, all new hires whose appointments are effective July 1 or
before the signing of a new
Collective Agreement shall receive all increases in salary for that year that become effective July 1, except for the PTR
increment, merit increment, or any other increase explicitly excluded by the new
Collective Agreement, irrespective of the actual date of commencement of employment.
ARTICLE 5.40 – ACADEMIC WORKLOAD
5.40.1 The academic workload shall be assigned in a fair and equitable manner. To help ensure this goal, each Member
of a Department/School shall receive a copy of the Chair's/Director’s recommendations to the Dean/University Librarian
on the Member's own workload and a summary of the recommendations on all other Members in the Department/School,
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 77

Collective Agreement 2008-11 including any recommendations for overloads, prior to the recommendations being
forwarded to the
Dean/University Librarian. Each Member shall receive by June 15 a copy of the Dean's/University
Librarian's decision on these recommendations.
5.40.2 The academic workload of a full-time Member during the academic year includes: (a) teaching/professional
librarianship/archives management, including the supervision of graduate and undergraduate students; (b) scholarly
activity, including commitments to external granting agencies; (c) University governance, administrative duties, and other
contributions to the University. The normal guideline for the distribution of the workload among the three (3) main
workload components is: forty percent (40%) teaching/professional librarianship/archives management, including the
supervision of graduate and undergraduate students; forty percent (40%) scholarly activity, including commitments to
external granting agencies; and twenty percent (20%) University governance, administrative duties, and other
contributions to the
University.
5.40.3 The assignment of the workload shall be communicated in reasonable detail, in writing, to the
Member by June 15 by the Dean/University
Librarian. The Dean/University Librarian shall by
April 15 request the written advice of the
Department/School concerned. The Chair/Director shall submit the written advice of the
Department/School by May 1 and the
Dean/University Librarian shall normally accept the advice of the Department/School. The time-tabling of the teaching
load/library assignment shall be communicated in writing to the Member by July 15 by the Dean/University Librarian after
consultation with the Registrar. For the duration of this Collective
Agreement the Registrar shall have final authority in time-tabling all courses.
5.40.4 The composition of the workload of Members may vary with their discipline, and will take into account the
capabilities of the Members, the need to maximize their potential and any obligations placed on them within the
University's operations, consistent with the terms of this Collective Agreement. In the assignment of teaching loads, the
Deans, in consultation with the Departments/Schools, shall consider not only the number of courses taught by a
Member, but the size and type of such courses as well as administrative and other duties. Members’ workloads shall also
be subject to the following maximum norms for assigned workloads.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 78

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(a) Teaching Members: In the assignment of teaching loads by the Deans, in consultation with the academic
Departments/Schools, the maximum normal teaching load per academic year shall be two (2) full courses or twelve
(12) credit equivalents in the Faculty of
Science and Engineering and two and one- half (2 ½) full courses or fifteen (15) credit equivalents in other Faculties.
(b) Professional Librarian and Archivist Members:
In the assignment of workloads by the
University Librarian, the normal hours of scheduled student contact shall not exceed twelve (12) per week, scheduled
fairly and equitably and on the recommendation of the
Department.
(c) Notwithstanding paragraph 5.40.4 (a) above,
Members on a twelve (12) month limited-term appointment may have a teaching load of three (3) credits above the normal
teaching load. This above-normal teaching load shall be for a maximum of twelve (12) months only.
Any extension of the twelve (12) month limited-term appointment or any additional limited-term appointments to the
Member shall be according to the normal teaching load as specified as per paragraph 5.40.4 (a) above.
5.40.5 The Dean/University Librarian may include in
Members' workloads any teaching/professional library or archival assignment related to their discipline and any
on-campus administrative activity that the Dean/University Librarian considers necessary for the effective operation of the
Faculty/Library or of the University program. With regard to the load for teaching/professional librarianship/professional
archival work, generally prevailing past practices shall apply unless these practices have been the result of Members
undertaking voluntarily unpaid overloads to maintain the integrity of programmes or service commitments in
Department/Schools which have suffered complement reductions due to budgetary pressures or unless specific
provisions in this contract state otherwise.
5.40.6 The determination of the workload shall be subject to the following conditions:
(a) The Dean/University Librarian, in accordance with Article 3.10 – Academic Freedom, shall not impose specific
scholarly tasks other than the teaching/professional librarianship duties
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 79

Collective Agreement 2008-11 referred to in clause 5.40.5 above. Specific tasks related to the internal governance of the
Department/School shall not be imposed by the Dean/University Librarian, except for the appointment of an Acting
Chair/Director as in
Articles 9.15 – Selection of Chairs/Directors and 9.20 – Term of Office of Chairs/Directors.
The Dean/University Librarian may assign specific responsibilities concerning a
University-related community activity in consultation with the Member. The Member shall not unreasonably refuse.
(b) The Dean/University Librarian shall normally not impose on any individual a workload in excess of that which in the
past has generally been applicable to Members within the
Faculty/Library to which the Member belongs.
The Parties agree that excessive overload teaching/professional library work is undesirable and for that reason
compensation for teaching-related overloads from all sources, including courses administered through the Centre for
Continuing Education, shall be limited to a maximum payable for twelve (12) credits per year with a maximum of nine (9)
credits in either the Fall/Winter or the Spring/Summer sessions, the Parties further agree that the twelve (12) credit
overload allowance shall be limited to three
(3) consecutive years.
Where the above limitation on total compensation to a Member involves a component from the supervision of a distance
education course(s) according to clause
8.40.5 of Article 8.40 – Distance Education
Courses, the University shall make available marking assistance as required and in keeping with the degree of limitation.
(c) From time to time, the Dean/University
Librarian, in consultation with the
Department/School may request a Member to undertake additional duties over and above the normal workload. In such
instances, an overload payment shall be made, as in Article
8.35 – Overloads. The Member shall not unreasonably refuse such assignments.
Members who believe they are entitled to overload payments shall apply through the
Dean/University Librarian to the Vice-
President, Academic within ten (10) working days after the assignment of the workload.
The Vice-President, Academic shall provide an answer, in writing, to the Member within ten (10) working days of her/his
application. If negative, the decision shall be accompanied with reasons.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 80

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(d) In the event that a workload assignment, with regard to the courses taught or professional librarian duties or other
assigned duties, is not acceptable to the Member or the
Department/School, after discussion with the
Dean/University Librarian, the Member or the
Department/School may appeal to the Vice-
President, Academic by July 15. The decision of the Vice-President, Academic shall be communicated in writing to the
Member and
Department/School before August 1.
(e) The credits for courses approved by Senate
(Council on English Language Programmes
(CELP) and Conseil des programmes en français (CPF)) shall not be altered when the
Dean assigns the teaching of any of these courses to a Member.
(f) When a Member is assigned to teach two (2) or more courses at the same time and location, she/he shall receive
workload credit for the course with maximum credits.
5.40.7 Once assigned, workloads shall not be altered except in cases of emergency. If a proposed workload must be
altered, such alteration will be taken into consideration in the annual performance evaluation. However, alterations for
reasonable program requirements and low enrolment may be made to Winter and Spring session courses by
October 1.
If the Dean, for non-emergency reasons, deems it necessary to alter the workload of a Member once it has been
assigned, the Dean must obtain the agreement of the Member.
Any alteration to a Member’s workload, including any associated overload payments shall be communicated to each
Member of the
Department/School within five (5) working days after the Member has been formally notified of the change.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this Article, when an assigned course(s) is cancelled because of zero registration in the
course(s) there arises an obligation on the part of the Member to undertake additional work in order to maintain fairness
and equity within the Department/School. The nature and extent of such work shall be determined in discussions between
the Member, the Chair of the
Department/School and the Dean. In the event that
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 81

Collective Agreement 2008-11 the Member was scheduled to receive an overload stipend such a stipend should be
reduced appropriately. In the case where additional work assigned is in the form of a course, such course shall be one the
Member has taught in the last two (2) years, unless otherwise agreed to by the Member.
5.40.8 The determination of the workload for Members of the teaching faculty shall also be subject to the following
conditions:
(a) A Member is entitled to one (1) term without scheduled teaching among the Fall, Winter and Spring terms as part of
her/his normal workload. The scheduled teaching duties as part of a Member’s normal workload shall normally be in the
Fall and Winter terms of the academic year.
(b) In the case of correspondence or off-campus courses, consultation times shall be arranged for the teaching locale in
accordance with the requirements of the subject matter. The
Chair/Director shall outline the norms in consultation with the Department/School.
(c) In the case of evening courses, the Dean shall not assign another course scheduled to begin within twelve (12) hours
of the scheduled end of the evening course unless the Member agrees to this in writing.
(d) With the exception of Members who are teaching at this University for the first time or teaching in a new program, no
Member shall be required in an academic year to prepare for more than one (1) full course or two (2) half (1/2) courses (or
equivalent) which she/he has not taught at least once during the previous four (4) years. Normally, no Member shall be
required to undertake such course preparation more than once every two (2) years, nor shall any Member be required to
undertake new course preparation unless requested to do so by June 1. Where a course is replaced by a renamed or
renumbered version of what is essentially the same course in the same language, it shall be deemed to be the same
course for purposes of this Article.
(e) Members may be required to supervise or develop distance education courses as part of their normal workload subject
to provisions of
Article 8.40 – Distance Education Courses.
Members whose appointments specifically included the development of distance
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 82

Collective Agreement 2008-11 education courses as part of their normal workload may be assigned such duties for the
duration of their contract(s).
(f) In order to enhance the ability of Members to undertake scholarly activity, it is desirable to schedule the teaching
activities in such a way as to create blocks of time free of scheduled teaching activities. For the Fall and Winter terms, the
scheduling of courses shall permit every Member to have at least one (1) day per week for scholarly activity during which
she/he is not expected to teach scheduled classes. Members wishing to create additional such days or blocks of time
without scheduled teaching shall approach the Chair/Director of the Departments/Schools and the Dean with an
appropriate request. These officials shall make reasonable efforts to accommodate such requests within the constraints
imposed by requirements of offering programs and courses to students. When competing requests for time blocks without
scheduled teaching cannot be met for all applicants, priority shall be given to those individuals who earlier have been
unsuccessful in making such a request, provided that these were based on bona fide requirements to enhance scholarly
activity.
(g) Full-time Members teaching in programs where the preparation of a thesis is mandatory for students have an
obligation to participate in the thesis supervision provided that they are qualified to do so. However, the
Parties agree that the close working relationship desirable for the successful preparation of a thesis is best achieved
under conditions that allow for mutual choice on the part of the Member and the student before entering the
supervisor/student relationship.
(h) Notwithstanding paragraph 5.40.6 (e) above, when a Member undertakes academic supervision of an individual
student in a program offered by Laurentian University, when such work is over and above the normal workload, such
supervisory work shall be recognized upon its successful defence or completion as follows:
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 83

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Supervisory work Credit Monetary value value at
$1,000 / credit
PhD Thesis 3 $3,000
Master’s Thesis or 1 $1,000
Advanced Practicum in Social Work
PhD or Master’s ½ $500
Research Project,
Research Essay,
Directed Reading
Seminar or
Independent Study
Undergraduate (cid:110) $333
Thesis where mandatory
Undergraduate ¼ $250
Directed Reading
Seminar or
Independent Study where mandatory
(i) The above credits may be shared by agreement between two (2) or more
Members who have contributed to the thesis or other supervision. In cases of disagreement, the Dean shall arbitrate the
proportions.
(ii) A Member’s teaching credits for individual supervisions as outlined in this paragraph can be accumulated towards a
reduction of the Member’s normal teaching load to a maximum of three (3) credits release per academic year. Unused
credits can be carried over to subsequent years. The scheduling of the reduction shall be with the mutual agreement of
the
Member and her/his Dean.
(iii) Alternatively, Members may be paid the credit value accumulated for any supervisory work in their professional
expenditure account. At any time,
Members may transfer the monetary value of the accumulated credits into their professional development expenditure
account.
(iv) Once the supervisory work has been completed, it shall be the responsibility of the Member to report such
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 84

Collective Agreement 2008-11 completion to the Dean on a form co- signed by her/his Chair/Director. The
Dean’s Office shall either register the credit on the Member’s workload credit account to be created in WebAdvisor or
transfer the funds to the Member’s professional development expenditure account, as the Member directs.
(v) Based on existing program requirements, the Dean shall identify those programs which have mandatory supervisory
needs as per paragraph
5.40.8 (g) above. Any Member planning to supervise an individual student in another program for credit under this
paragraph needs the prior authorization of the Dean.
(vi) The subparagraphs 5.40.8 (h) (i) to
5.40.8 (h) (iv) above do not apply to
Research Chairs who already received a teaching load reduction.
5.40.9 The determination of the workload for professional librarians shall also be subject to the following conditions:
(a) Members may be requested to offer service during one (1) evening per week and if requested, they shall not
unreasonably refuse, provided that such requests are made on a fair and equitable basis.
(b) Professional librarians may be expected to carry library supervisory duties.
5.40.10 In order to promote scholarly activity, as defined by section B) Scholarly Activity of Article 5.15 – Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of Academics within the
University, a Member may have her/his teaching/library service workload altered. Requests for workload reductions as a
result of other paid activity shall be considered in accordance with the provisions of Article 7.35 – Voluntary Reduced
Workload. However, contract research where the
Member is paid a stipend not to exceed twenty thousand dollars ($20,000) for her/his services may be considered under
this provision.
(a) Without compensation to the University:
For such an assignment to become operative, it shall require the recommendation of the
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 85

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Department/School, of the Dean/University
Librarian, and approval of the Vice-President,
Academic. Faculty Members who receive one
(1) or more course reductions for purposes of enhancing scholarly activity, including the preparation of teaching materials
for the
Centre for Continuing Education, shall not be entitled to overloads as per paragraph 5.40.6
(b) above. This restriction shall also apply to
Librarians whose workload is also reduced for scholarly purposes.
(b) With compensation to the University:
A Member with a regular teaching load may elect to buy-out of up to fifteen (15) credits of teaching load over five (5)
years, not to exceed six (6) credits per year, or the equivalent of professional library service in order to concentrate on
research activities. It is acknowledged that certain grants may require a reduction in teaching loads exceeding fifteen (15)
credits. The buy-out must be applied for no later than April 1 of the year preceding the academic year for which it is
requested and the Dean/University
Librarian shall not unreasonably refuse such request. The Dean/University Librarian shall communicate her/his decision
by May 1. The buy-out shall cover the actual cost (including benefits) to replace the teaching/professional library work but
shall not exceed the overload or sessional rate of pay as appropriate. A
Member shall not be refused such a request for two (2) consecutive years.
5.40.11 The workload of any or all Members shall be made known to the Union on request.
5.40.12 It is acknowledged that the provision of teaching assistants is a factor to be considered in the assignment of
workloads. As such the Vice-
President, Academic will ensure to the greatest degree possible the equitable distribution amongst the Faculties of such
assistance, consistent with the policies of Academic Councils.
ARTICLE 5.45 – ANNUAL REPORT FOR MEMBERS
5.45.1 All full-time Members, except those on sabbatical or study leave who have given prior notice to their
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 86

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Dean/University Librarian of their intent to postpone submission until their return, shall submit a report in writing on their
activities for the preceding twelve (12) months to the Dean/University Librarian, through the
Chair/Director, by May 15. The report will cover all components of her/his responsibilities as listed under
Article 5.15 – Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of
Academics.
Members on sabbatical or study leave are covered by
Article 7.25 – Sabbatical Leaves and 7.30 – Study
Leave respectively.
5.45.2 In preparing their reports, Members shall use the appropriate standardised form developed for each
Faculty and the Library.
5.45.3 It is also the responsibility of the Members to provide annually an up-to-date and corrected curriculum vitae for their
personnel file.
ARTICLE 5.50 – ASSESSMENT OF A MEMBER'S
PERFORMANCE
5.50.1 When making an assessment, the assessing body shall consider the Member’s performance in the areas outlined
in Article 5.15 – Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of Academics.
5.50.2 The assessing body may consider as mitigating factors:
(a) The bilingual and tricultural character of
Laurentian University.
(b) In the case of Librarians, the amount of time available for scholarly activities.
5.50.3 The assessment of a Member's teaching performance shall be based on:
Senate approved course evaluations and the
Member's annual teaching dossier.
(a) During each term of the academic year, the
Employer shall administer the course evaluations approved by the Laurentian
University Senate. The Vice-President,
Academic shall be responsible for the distribution and collection of the said instruments. It is agreed that Members shall
have access to the results of course evaluations prior to their use by the University.
In the case of co-taught courses, the following shall apply:
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 87

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(i) For courses co-taught sequentially, there shall be separate evaluations for each professor prior to the end of each
sequence.
(ii) For all other co-taught courses, the information provided to the FPC will indicate that the evaluation in question shall be
viewed with caution.
(b) It is the responsibility of Members to maintain on an annual basis their teaching dossiers. For each course, the annual
dossier must contain at least the following material:
(i) Course syllabus and sufficient material to permit an evaluation of the contents of the course, the teaching/learning
process, and the means of assessing the performance of the students.
(ii) Sufficient material to permit the evaluation of the Member's teaching performance as perceived by groups such as
graduates, peers, or students.
(iii) The file should also contain any other material that the Member deems relevant to her/his teaching role.
(iv) In the case of co-taught courses, the
Member shall include in the dossier information about which parts of the course/s fell within her/his responsibility for
course preparation, scheduled classroom, laboratory and tutorial time with students, evaluation of students, and course
administration.
(c) Committees, which may use the results of the course evaluations and the contents of the teaching dossier in their
deliberations, shall receive suitable guidelines on their use and interpretation from the Vice-President,
Academic.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 88

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Should a Member feel that a course should be exempt from the approved evaluation process, reasons for exemption
should be addressed to the Vice-President,
Academic no later than the end of the first week of classes in that course. The Vice-President, Academic will
communicate her/his decision on the request prior to the planned date of the course evaluation.
5.50.4 Notwithstanding the priorities for teaching/librarianship and/or scholarly activities as noted in the various articles in
this Collective Agreement, the Parties recognise that the University benefits greatly from significant contributions in many
areas including academic administration and/or university governance, continuous involvement in a Member's
professional/learned society or in a community activity directly related to the work of the University. The
Parties agree that Members who have made such contributions shall have these contributions taken into especial account
as compensating for lesser performance in another area.
Notwithstanding the priorities for scholarly activities as noted in the various articles in this Collective
Agreement, the Parties recognise that the University benefits greatly from the contributions of Members who are
exceptional teachers. Members who can make such a contribution shall have this taken into especial account as
compensating for lesser performance in another area. When considering librarians, professional service and library
management skills shall be substituted for "teaching".
5.50.5 Every assessing body shall put forward its recommendation or decision in written form setting forth its findings and
grounds for recommendation or decision in order that a Member may know which factors were persuasive in a
recommendation or decision.
5.50.6 In all considerations of renewal (included in Article
5.20 – Appointment and Renewal), tenure (Article
5.60 – Tenure Evaluation Procedures), promotion
(Article 5.65 – Promotion Procedures) and merit increments (Article 8.25 – Merit Increments) the following assessment
procedure shall be used:
(a) The applicant shall submit her/his academic dossier to the Dean/University Librarian, who shall make a copy available
to the
Department/School. Members of the
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 89

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Department/School who are eligible to participate in the assessment shall have access to the applicant’s dossier.
(b) The criteria for a Member’s eligibility to vote and to participate in the assessment of applications for renewal, tenure,
promotion and merit awards are set out in each of the respective procedural articles referenced in clause 5.50.6 above.
Eligible Members who are on sabbatical or other leaves, except leaves of absence without pay or long-term disability,
continue to have the right to vote and to participate in the assessment process.
(c) In a timely fashion and with sufficient notice the Chair/Director of the Department/School or designate shall convene a
meeting of the eligible Members to assess the applicant’s academic dossier. Those eligible shall meet as often as
necessary for the purpose of writing a joint single letter of assessment for the application. A vote on the application shall
occur and be recorded. The eventual joint single letter of assessment shall be communicated to the applicant.
(d) The proceedings of the meetings are to be undertaken in camera. It is understood that nothing in this Article shall
prevent a Member from discussing with the Union concerns about potential breaches of the Collective
Agreement.
(e) In exceptional circumstances, where an eligible Member is unable to attend
Department/School assessment committee meetings, the Member may submit to the committee an individual letter of
assessment with her/his recommendation and vote, both of which shall be incorporated into the joint single letter of
assessment of the
Department/School. The individual letter of assessment with her/his recommendation and vote shall be provided and read
to the
Department/School assessment committee during the course of its deliberations.
(f) The joint single letter of assessment shall state the recommendation, the reasons and evidence for the
recommendation, the votes for, against and abstaining from the recommendation, and the names of Members
participating in the assessment process. The joint single letter of assessment shall include both majority and minority
recommendations and reasons for the different
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 90

Collective Agreement 2008-11 recommendations where Members request.
Prior to its submission, the assessment committee’s joint single letter of assessment shall be reviewed by all participants
in the assessment process for final approval of its accuracy. Participants who do not approve of the joint single letter of
assessment may submit a written signed letter regarding the accuracy of the joint single letter of assessment which shall
be attached to the joint single letter of assessment.
(g) A copy of the joint single letter of assessment with any submitted attachment/s as referenced in paragraph 5.50.6 (f)
above will comprise the complete assessment of the applicant by the assessment committee. The
Chair/Director of the Department/School shall forward the complete assessment of the applicant by the assessment
committee simultaneously to the applicant and to the
Chair of the FPC/FFPC/LPC. The applicant has the right to respond in writing to the complete assessment of the applicant
by the assessment committee within five (5) working days of its receipt. The applicant shall send her/his response, if any,
directly to the Chair of the FPC/FFPC/LPC.
(h) In assessing applicants, the Dean/University
Librarian shall not see internal or external letters of assessment before submitting her/his own independent letter of
assessment of the applicant. The Dean/University
Librarian shall forward her/his own independent letter of assessment of the applicant simultaneously to the Chair of the
FPC/FFPC/LPC and to the applicant. The applicant has the right to respond in writing to the Dean’s/University Librarian’s
independent letter of assessment of the applicant within five (5) working days of its receipt. The applicant shall send
her/his response, if any, directly to the Chair of the FPC/FFPC/LPC.
(i) All letters of assessment internal to the
University shall be signed and the recommendations shall be based on evidence.
(j) In Departments/Schools with fewer than four
(4) eligible colleagues apart from the applicant, the applicant’s Dean/University
Librarian in consultation with the
Department/School and approval of the
Union, shall add eligible Members from other
Departments/Schools so that a minimum of four (4) eligible Members is attained.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 91

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(k) Where the applicant is appointed to more than one (1) Department/School, a written assessment concerning the
contributions the applicant has made to the cross-appointed
Department/School shall be undertaken by the cross-appointed Department/School provided in accordance with the terms
specified in clause 5.20.32 and clause
5.20.33 of Article 5.20 – Appointment and
Renewal. The complete assessment of the applicant by the assessment committee of the
Department/School of primary responsibility and the written assessment of the cross- appointed Department/School shall
be weighted by the FPC/FFPC/LPC to reflect proportionately the extent of the Member’s responsibilities in each of the
Departments/Schools. The applicant has the right to respond to the written assessment of the cross-appointed
Department/School in writing within five (5) working days of its receipt. The applicant shall send her/his response, if any,
directed to the Chair of the
FPC/FFPC/LPC.
(l) Any required external letters of assessment as per Article 5.65 – Promotion Procedures shall be sent directly to the
Vice-President,
Academic, who shall edit these external letters of assessment only to conceal the identities of the external assessors. The
Vice-President, Academic shall then forward the external letters of assessment simultaneously to the Chair of the
FPC/FFPC/LPC and the applicant. The applicant has the right to respond in writing to the external letters of assessment
within five
(5) working days of its receipt.
(m) The Chair of the FPC/FFPC/LPC shall make available the academic dossier of the applicant to the FPC/FFPC/LPC
and simultaneously send to the FPC/FFPC/LPC and to the applicant the complete assessment of the applicant by the
assessment committee(s), the independent letter of assessment as authored by the
Dean/University Librarian, all applicant response letters and any external letters of assessment.
(n) When the FPC/FFPC/LPC has completed its inquiries and deliberations in accordance with its responsibilities as
outlined in clause 5.55.6 of Article 5.55 – Faculty/Francophone
Faculty/Library Personnel Committee, it will forward its letter of recommendation on the applicant's application, including
reasons for its recommendation, to the Vice-President,
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 92

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Academic with a copy to the applicant. Each letter of recommendation on the applicant’s application shall contain the
following paragraph: "The Member may make written representations to the Vice-President,
Academic within ten (10) working days of the date on which the FPC/FFPC/LPC forwards to the Member a copy of its
letter of recommendation on the applicant’s application to the Vice-President, Academic."
(o) The Vice-President, Academic shall confirm or reject the FPC/FFPC/LPC's recommendation or refer it back to the
FPC/FFPC/LPC for further clarification of specified issues. In the case of referrals, the
Committee must re-examine and address the
Vice-President, Academic's concern.
(p) The final decision of the Vice-President,
Academic shall be communicated in writing with reasons to the Member with a copy to the
Union. The FPC/FFPC/LCP and the
Dean/University Librarian shall receive a copy of the letter sent to the Member. In making a final decision, the
Vice-President, Academic shall take into consideration the written representations outlined in paragraph 5.50.6
(n) above of the applicant to the Vice-
President, Academic. In cases of referrals, the Vice-President, Academic, in making a final decision, shall also take into
consideration the response of the
FPC/FFPC/LPC to the specific concerns expressed.
(q) The specific deadlines and procedures applicable for renewal, tenure, promotion and merit increments are outlined in
Article 5.20 –
Appointment and Renewal, Article 5.60 –
Tenure Evaluation Procedures, Article 5.65 –
Promotion Procedures and Article 8.25 –
Merit Increments, respectively.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 93

Collective Agreement 2008-11
ARTICLE 5.55 – FACULTY/FRANCOPHONE
FACULTY/LIBRARY PERSONNEL COMMITTEE
5.55.1 Structure of the FPC/FFPC/LPC
(a) In each Faculty there shall be a Faculty
Personnel Committee (FPC) composed of seven (7) elected Members plus one (1) alternate. A Dean/University Librarian
appointed by the Vice-President, Academic shall be the non-voting Chair. All Members of the FPC must be tenured and
no more than two (2) Members shall belong to the same academic Department/School. Except as provided in paragraph
5.55.1 (c) below, at least three (3) Members shall be Full
Professors from within that Faculty. Every effort shall be made to seek nominations from female Members.
(b) There shall also be a Francophone Faculty
Personnel Committee (FFPC) composed of eight (8) members, two (2) from each of the four (4) existing Faculties. The
elected
Member with the lowest number of votes shall serve as the alternate. A Dean/University
Librarian appointed by the Vice-President,
Academic (Francophone Affairs) shall be the non-voting Chair. All Members of the FFPC must be tenured and qualified
Francophone
Members i.e. must have taught or be scheduled to teach a course in French at
Laurentian. Except as provided in paragraph
5.55.1 (d) below, at least three (3) Members shall be Full Professors. Potential candidates will be identified by the Office
of the Vice-
President, Academic (Francophone Affairs).
Every effort shall be made to seek nominations from female Members.
If a Member wishes to have her/his case heard by the Francophone Faculty Personnel
Committee, this intention must be indicated in writing at the time the application is made; otherwise the application will be
heard by the appropriate FPC. Applications are to be sent to the appropriate Dean who will forward these to the
non-voting Chair of the Francophone
Faculty Personnel Committee. Once a
Member has selected a Committee, she/he is not free to change to another Committee either in that academic year or in
the following year if the application was unsuccessful.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 94

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(c) In the Library, there shall be a Library
Personnel Committee (LPC) composed of five
(5) elected Members and one (1) alternate. A
Dean appointed by the Vice-President,
Academic shall be the non-voting Chair. All
Members of the LPC must be tenured and except as provided in paragraph 5.55.1 (d) below, two (2) Members shall be
Full
Professors/Librarians. There shall be at least two (2) Members from the Library and at least two (2) must be Members of a
Faculty outside the Library. Every effort shall be made to seek nominations from female Members. In the event that a
Member from the Library wishes to have her/his case heard by a Francophone
Faculty Personnel Committee the Parties will reach agreement on the composition of such a
Committee by Memorandum of Agreement.
(d) In the event that the requirements in paragraphs 5.55.1 (a), (b) or (c) above cannot be met, the first priority in dealing
with insufficient Members at a rank shall be to seek nominations by Members of that
Faculty/Library of Members of another
Faculty/Library at the required rank. The second priority shall be to seek nominations by
Members of that Faculty/Library of Members from the next lower rank within the same
Faculty/Library.
(e) In the Faculty of Management, there shall be a Faculty Personnel Committee (FPC) composed of five (5) elected
Members and one (1) alternate. A Dean appointed by the
Vice-President, Academic shall be the non- voting Chair. All Members of this FPC must be tenured and except as
provided in paragraph 5.55.1 (d) above, two (2) Members shall be Full Professors/Librarians. There shall be two (2)
Members from the School of
Commerce, one (1) from the School of Sports
Administration and two (2) must be Members of a Faculty outside the Faculty of
Management. Every effort shall be made to seek nominations from female Members.
5.55.2 Election of the FPC/FFPC/LPC Members
(a) The Secretary of Senate shall conduct the elections of the Faculty/Library Personnel
Committees by October 15 of each year. The
Employer and the Union each shall appoint one (1) scrutineer for the elections.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 95

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(b) Nominations shall be by Members of each
Faculty/Library. Voting shall be by Members of the faculty/library for Members of their own
FPC/FFPC/LPC. Qualified Francophone
Members may vote in the elections for faculty representatives on both the FPC and FFPC.
Elections shall be conducted by the office of the Secretary of Senate by secret preferential ballot. Except as described in
paragraph
5.55.1 (b) above the alternate will be the nominee, not elected who received the greatest number of votes.
(c) Any tenured Member may be a member of the
FPC/FFPC/LPC it being understood that:
(i) No Vice-Dean may be a committee member.
(ii) The President of the Union and the
Chief Grievance Officer of the Union may not be committee members.
(iii) An elected member may not serve for more than two (2) consecutive terms.
(iv) A Member may not be a committee member during the academic year she/he is on sabbatical.
(v) No Member may serve on more than one (1) FPC/FFPC/LPC in the same academic year.
(d) In the event that any positions of an
FPC/FFPC/LPC are not filled through the election process outlined, the Dean/University
Librarian, or in the case of the FFPC, the Vice-
President, Academic (Francophone Affairs), and an appointee of the Union’s Board shall seek, within five (5) working
days, a mutually acceptable candidate(s) who shall be named to serve.
5.55.3 Term of Office and Vacancies
(a) The term of office of elected and appointed
FPC/FFPC/LPC members shall be two (2) years, starting on October 16 following the election. To ensure continuity, the
terms shall be staggered.
(c) A committee member who makes an application for promotion or for whatever reason is being evaluated by the
FPC/FFPC/LPC shall be deemed to have resigned from the committee.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 96

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(c) In the event that replacements are needed, the
Dean/University Librarian or in the case of the
FFPC, the Vice-President, Academic
(Francophone Affairs) and an appointee of the
Union’s Board shall (subject to clause 5.55.1 above) seek a mutually acceptable tenured candidate who shall be named to
serve.
5.55.4 Voting, Recording and Reporting Procedures
(a) A quorum shall consist of the full committee.
The alternate may replace any elected
Member when needed to obtain quorum.
(b) The alternate Member shall act in the absence of a regular Member in order to obtain quorum.
A regular Member who is unable to attend meetings shall so inform the Chair. The Chair shall formally invite the alternate
to replace the regular Member. The alternate Member shall be kept informed of Committee proceedings and shall be
invited to attend all meetings. The alternate Member has an obligation to stay abreast of the matters discussed.
(c) All decisions of the Committee shall be recorded. In order to establish which factors were persuasive in any given
decision, the
FPC/FFPC/LPC shall set forth in its decision its findings and the grounds for its decision.
These decisions shall be kept in the office of the Dean/University Librarian and in the case of the FFPC, in the office of the
appropriate
Dean and shall be available to the members of the Committee. Committee members shall make their decisions in a
manner consistent with the Collective Agreement. A copy of the decisions shall be forwarded to the applicant.
Each decision shall contain the following paragraph: "The Member may make written representations to the
Vice-President,
Academic within ten (10) working days of the date on which the FPC/FFPC/LPC forwards to the Member a copy of its
decision to the Vice-
President, Academic."
(d) Decisions of the FPC/FFPC/LPC on renewal shall be by majority vote. Decisions of the
FPC/FFPC, excluding the FPC for the Faculty of Management, on tenure and promotion shall require five (5) positive
votes. Decisions of the
LPC and the FPC for the Faculty of
Management on tenure and promotion shall require four (4) positive votes. Members of the committee shall record their
vote on an official
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 97

Collective Agreement 2008-11 ballot with their name on it and shall write on the ballot a reasonable opinion supporting the
vote. The Chair shall rely on these opinions in writing the committee's decision. Prior to sending the committee's decision
to the Vice-
President, Academic, the report must be brought to FPC/FFPC/LPC for review.
Members of the committee who wish to add a minority opinion may do so by submitting a written signed opinion which will
be attached to the majority decision. Official ballots shall be retained until all procedures up to and including arbitration
have been exhausted.
(e) Prior to the end of each academic year (April
7), the Chair of the FPC/FFPC/LPC shall make an annual report to the Vice-President,
Academic summarising the activities and decisions of the FPC/FFPC/LPC. This report shall indicate all decisions that
were referred back to the FPC/FFPC/LPC by the Vice-
President, Academic. A copy of this annual report shall also be sent to the President of the
Union.
5.55.5 Operating Procedures
The Chairs of FPC/FFPC/LPC shall ensure that at the commencement of evaluations for promotion and tenure all
members of the Committee are familiar with the employment equity policies.
(a) No Member of an FPC/FFPC/LPC shall participate in the evaluation/assessment of
Members at the Department/School level.
(b) (i) An applicant may ask that an
FPC/FFPC/LPC Member recuse herself/himself in her/his particular case, on the grounds that a conflict of interest exists,
or that a reasonable apprehension of bias exists, subject to
Appendix J – Committee on the
Apprehension of Bias. The applicant shall state the reasons in writing to the
Chair of the Committee. The Chair shall render a decision with reasons to the applicant and the Member in question if the
Member is to be recused. Even without a request from the applicant, the Chair of the
FPC/FFPC/LPC may require a Member to recuse herself/himself on one (1) of the same two (2) grounds. A Member may
recuse herself/himself on her/his own volition.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 98

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(ii) In the context of collegial decision making, prior service in the same
Department/School, joint service on
University or Union committees or other normal acquaintance by itself does not necessarily constitute grounds for the
presumption of conflict of interest or bias.
(c) Before making any decision or recommendation on any individual Member, the FPC/FFPC/LPC shall:
(i) Invite the Member to meet with the
FPC/FFPC/LPC. The Member may be accompanied by a colleague of her/his choice.
(ii) Take into account but not be limited to the following evidence:
Those parts of the Member's current personnel file that are relevant to the matter being discussed. The Member shall be
provided with a list of material from the personnel file that is being considered and that has not accompanied the
application.
The assessments by the
Members of the
Department(s)/School(s) and by the Dean/University Librarian.
Any relevant material specified in the applicant's letter of application or curriculum vitae.
The applicant shall be responsible within reason for producing one true copy of any material that she/he wishes to be
considered.
The oral and/or written submission made by the applicant.
Such other factual information as is necessary to understand the evidence.
(d) Once an FPC/FFPC/LPC has started to consider a case, it shall be the responsibility of that FPC/FFPC/LPC to see
that case through to completion even if the process extends
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 99

Collective Agreement 2008-11 beyond one (1) academic year. In the event that replacements are needed, the
Dean/University Librarian and an appointee of the Union’s Board shall (subject to clause
5.55.1 above) seek a mutually acceptable tenured Member(s) who shall be named to serve.
5.55.6 Responsibilities of the FPC/FFPC/LPC
(a) To formulate and forward to the Vice-President,
Academic its decisions for those Members of the Faculty/Library whose names are being considered for the following:
(i) Renewal of Probationary Appointment per Article 5.20 – Appointment and
Renewal;
(ii) Tenure per Article 5.60 – Tenure
Evaluation Procedures;
(iii) Promotion per Article 5.65 – Promotion
Procedures;
(iv) Merit increments as per Article 8.25 –
Merit Increments.
(b) To make submissions on such matters as termination due to redundancy or financial exigency when requested to do
so.
(c) To act as consultant on any other matters as requested by the University or required by the terms of this Collective
Agreement.
5.55.7 Deadlines
In the event that an FPC/FFPC/LPC is unable to meet any of the deadlines set out in this Collective
Agreement by virtue of its inability to meet with quorum, then all subsequent deadlines in the particular procedure are
extended by the length of time that FPC/FFPC/LPC requires to meet with quorum and make its decision or
recommendation.
ARTICLE 5.60 – TENURE EVALUATION PROCEDURES
5.60.1 In the interest of the University community and of society at large tenure protects free criticism and independent
judgement and hence forms an integral
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 100

Collective Agreement 2008-11 part of Academic Freedom per Article 3.10 –
Academic Freedom.
5.60.2 Tenure means permanency of appointment. Such an appointment may be terminated through resignation,
retirement, dismissal for cause as established by a proper hearing, redundancy or financial exigency consistent with the
terms of this Collective
Agreement, or as otherwise stated in this Collective
Agreement. Tenure includes the right during appointment to academic freedom and to fair consideration for increases in
responsibility and salary, and promotions in rank.
5.60.3 Tenure Evaluation
(a) Members on probationary appointments shall normally begin to undergo a formal tenure evaluation by the
FPC/FFPC/LPC no later than September 30 of the final year of their probationary status. However, Members may apply
for tenure one (1) year prior to the final year of their probationary status. An early application for tenure may not result in a
termination of appointment. Members considered for tenure at the end of the normal probationary period may be awarded
tenure, denied tenure, or if the Member has not made an early application for tenure, may have her/his probationary
period extended by one
(1) additional year, during which she/he shall be evaluated for tenure for a final time. A
Member may not be considered for tenure more than twice.
(b) All Members on probationary appointments shall begin to undergo a formal tenure evaluation by the FPC/FFPC/LPC
no later than September 30 of the final year of their probationary status.
(i) However, in recognition of the fact that
Members may have to deal with heavier than normal personal responsibilities or extraordinary circumstances, not faced
by the majority of other Members, the opportunity is provided for a Member to request a delay of up to two (2) years in the
tenure review process.
Members wishing to delay their final tenure evaluation must apply in writing to the appropriate Dean/University
Librarian no later than August 1 of the
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 101

Collective Agreement 2008-11 final year of their probationary appointment describing the special circumstances why a
delay in tenure review is requested, identifying the particular area in the performance of the Member that would be
strengthened by the delay and what steps the Member will take to meet the requirements for tenure during the period of
the delay. The
Dean/University Librarian, after discussion with the appropriate
Department(s)/School(s) will forward a recommendation to the Vice-
President, Academic who will render a decision by September 8. The Vice-
President, Academic may authorise a delay in tenure evaluation for up to two
(2) years. If the Vice-President,
Academic does not authorise a delay in tenure evaluation, the evaluation will proceed. Failure by the Vice-
President, Academic to authorise a delay in tenure evaluation shall not be subject to grievance and arbitration.
(ii) Members who have taken pregnancy, parental or adoption leave as provided under Article 7.60 – Pregnancy,
Parental and Adoption Leaves during their probationary period may elect to postpone the mandated evaluations leading to
tenure (both the evaluation for renewal of the probationary appointment and the final tenure evaluation) by one (1) year for
each incident of leave period.
(c) For the teaching faculty, in making its recommendations, the FPC/FFPC shall be guided by the following standards:
(i) A record of satisfactory teaching in the pre-tenure years based on the teaching dossier and approved course
evaluations as set out in Article 5.15 –
Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of
Academics and clause 5.50.2 of Article
5.50 – Assessment of a Member’s
Performance. The nature and scope of past teaching activities shall be
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 102

Collective Agreement 2008-11 taken into account in assessing a
Member. If the applicant has faced problems in teaching, the FPC/FFPC will look for evidence that the applicant has
recognized the problems, has taken steps to improve, and has made some improvements.
(ii) A record of satisfactory scholarly activity as defined in Article 5.15 –
Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of
Academics. The applicant shall show progress in independent research or creative activity.
(iii) A record of contributions to University governance and administrative duties as set out in Article 5.15 – Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of
Academics.
(iv) The applicant has met the formal educational or professional qualifications for the rank of Assistant
Professor and bilingualism qualifications as set out in Article 5.10
– Academic Qualifications Guidelines, clause 3.30.5 of Article 3.30 –
Bilingualism and Letter of
Appointment, consistent with the
Collective Agreement.
(v) The FPC/FFPC shall be flexible in assessing stronger performance in some areas against weaker performance in
other areas as set out in clause 5.50.3 of Article 5.50 –
Assessment of a Member’s
Performance. However, in no instance shall it recommend tenure for an applicant if teaching performance is judged
mostly unsatisfactory or if the applicant is not engaged in a program of scholarly activity.
(d) For the librarian faculty, in making its recommendations, the LPC/FFPC shall be guided by the following standards:
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 103

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(i) A record of satisfactory professional librarianship/archives management in the pre-tenure years based on the academic
dossier as set out in Article
5.15 – Rights, Responsibilities and
Duties of Academics and Article 5.50 –
Assessment of a Member’s
Performance. If the applicant has faced problems in professional librarianship/archives management, the LPC/FFPC will
look for evidence that the applicant has recognized the problems, has taken steps to improve, and has made some
improvements.
(ii) A record of satisfactory scholarly activity as defined in Article 5.15 –
Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of
Academics. The applicant shall show progress in independent research or creative activity.
(iii) A record of contributions to University governance and administrative duties as set out in Article 5.15 – Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of
Academics.
(iv) The applicant has met the formal educational/professional/linguistic qualifications for the rank of Assistant
Librarian or Assistant Archivist and bilingualism qualifications as set out in
Article 5.10 – Academic Qualifications
Guidelines, clause 3.30.5 of Article
3.30 – Bilingualism and Letter of
Appointment, consistent with the
Collective Agreement.
(v) The LPC/FFPC shall be flexible in assessing stronger performance in some areas against weaker performance in
other areas as set out in clause 5.50.3 of Article 5.50 –
Assessment of a Member’s
Performance. However, in no instance shall it recommend tenure for an applicant if the applicant’s performance in
professional librarianship/archives management is
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 104

Collective Agreement 2008-11 judged mostly unsatisfactory or if the applicant is not engaged in a program of scholarly
activity.
(e) In making recommendations in tenure cases, the FPC/FFPC/LPC shall conduct its assessment of the applicant’s
application according to Article 5.50 – Assessment of a
Member’s Performance subject to the following:
(i) Only tenured Members of the appropriate Department(s)/School(s) are eligible to participate in the assessment process
of the applicant’s application except under the circumstances defined in clause 5.50.6
(j) of Article 5.50 – Assessment of a
Member’s Performance. By October
15, each tenured Member has a responsibility to participate in the assessment process, except those on sabbatical or
other leaves.
(ii) The Chair/Director of the
Department/School shall forward to the Chair of the FPC/FFPC/LPC the academic dossier and the complete assessment
of the applicant by the assessment committee not later than
October 20. The Dean/University
Librarian shall forward to the Chair of the FPC/FFPC/LPC her/his independent letter of assessment of the applicant not
later than October
20.
(iii) The Chair of the FPC/FFPC/LPC shall make available the academic dossier of the applicant to the FPC/FFPC/LPC
and simultaneously send to the
FPC/FFPC/LPC and to the applicant the complete assessment of the applicant by the assessment committee(s), the
independent letter of assessment as authored by the
Dean/University Librarian, all applicant response letters and any external letters of assessment not later than the end of
the business day on the second
(2nd) working day which follows the
October 20 deadline as referenced in subparagraph 5.60.3 (e) (ii) above.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 105

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(iv) The FPC/FFPC/LPC shall interview the applicant.
(v) The FPC/FFPC/LPC shall submit its letter of recommendation on the applicant’s application, including reasons for its
recommendation, to the
Vice-President, Academic with a copy to the applicant not later than
November 30 of the academic year in which the assessment takes place.
Each letter of recommendation on the applicant’s application shall contain the following paragraph: "The
Member may make written representations to the Vice-President,
Academic within ten (10) working days of the date on which the
FPC/FFPC/LPC forwards to the
Member a copy of its letter of recommendation on the applicant’s application to the Vice-President,
Academic."
5.60.4 Within thirty (30) working days of receipt of the
FPC/FFPC/LPC recommendation, the Vice-
President, Academic shall confirm or reject the recommendation, or refer it back to the
FPC/FFPC/LPC for further clarification of specified issues. In the case of referrals, the Committee must re-examine and
address the Vice-President,
Academic’s concern within twenty-one (21) working days.
5.60.5 The final decision of the Vice-President, Academic, whether or not to offer tenure, shall be communicated in writing
with reasons to the Member with a copy to the Union by February 25 of the academic year in which the Member is
considered for tenure. The FPC/FFPC/LPC and the
Dean/University Librarian shall receive a copy of the letter sent to the Member. In making a final decision, the
Vice-President, Academic shall take into consideration the written representations outlined in subparagraph 5.60.3 (e) (v)
above of the applicant to the Vice-President, Academic. In cases of referrals, the Vice-President, Academic, in making a
final decision, shall also take into consideration the response of the FPC/FFPC/LPC to the specific concerns expressed. If
the decision is not communicated to the Member by March 1, the
Member will be guaranteed employment for the next academic year. In any event, a failure to meet deadlines shall not
constitute the awarding of tenure.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 106

Collective Agreement 2008-11
5.60.6 All Members of the Bargaining Unit with tenure on
July 1, 1980 shall continue to have tenure.
5.60.7 All full-time professional Librarians of the Bargaining
Unit having previously been evaluated for a permanent position at the University shall be deemed to have tenure effective
July 1, 1980.
ARTICLE 5.65 – PROMOTION PROCEDURES
5.65.1 The term "promotion" applies to advancement from the rank of Lecturer to Assistant Professor, Assistant
Professor to Associate Professor and Associate
Professor to Full Professor, or to corresponding advancement for the Librarians from the rank of
General Librarian to Assistant Librarian, Assistant
Librarian to Associate Librarian and Associate
Librarian to Full Librarian.
5.65.2 A Member is eligible to apply for promotion while on leave, but the Member is responsible for maintaining contact
with the University and for all expenses incurred in making appearances when requested.
5.65.3 Members shall normally apply for their own promotion. Applications may also be submitted by
Chairs/Directors, or a Dean/University Librarian on behalf of Members who have not themselves applied where the
Members have declared their willingness to be considered.
5.65.4 Applications shall be made on the prescribed application form and forwarded in triplicate to the office of the
applicant's Dean/University Librarian, together with three (3) copies of all necessary and relevant documentation.
5.65.5 The application for promotion shall reach the
Dean/University Librarian not later than September
30, for decision in that academic year. Members are urged to consult with the Dean/University Librarian well in advance of
the application deadline. If the
Member so requests by September 8, the
Dean/University Librarian will prepare a preliminary written assessment based on the requirements set out in the
appropriate clauses of Article 5.10 – Academic
Qualifications Guidelines within one (1) week of receiving the Member’s application. A copy of this assessment will
immediately be forwarded to the
Member who will then have one (1) week to decide whether or not to proceed with the application.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 107

Collective Agreement 2008-11
5.65.6 The following documents must be attached to the application for promotion and must be submitted at the time of
application:
(a) An updated curriculum vitae of the applicant.
(b) For applications for promotion to Full
Professor/Librarian:
(i) A list of at least three (3) referees, of which two (2) will be chosen, from outside the University qualified to assess the
research and creative works of the applicant.
(ii) A copy of the research and creative works the applicant wishes to have considered in the examination of the
application, it being understood that the applicant may attach a clear and detailed description of these works when the
works are such that their physical submission is not practical.
Barring unusual circumstances, it is assumed that all research and creative works submitted by the applicant will be made
available to the external referees for review.
5.65.7 In making recommendations in promotion cases, the assessment procedure in Article 5.50 – Assessment of a
Member’s Performance is to be followed. Those eligible to vote in promotions shall be tenured members.
5.65.8 Under the terms of Article 5.50 – Assessment of a
Member’s Performance, the Dean/University Librarian will prepare an independent letter of assessment for each Member
who has applied for promotion. She/He shall forward this to the appropriate FPC/FFPC/LPC not later than October 31. For
promotions to the rank of Full Professor/Librarian, the Dean/University
Librarian may append additional comments to the assessment within one (1) week of receiving the reports of the external
assessors. These assessments shall be made available to Members as soon as they are prepared and at least one (1)
week before an FPC/FFPC/LPC considers a given case.
5.65.9 The appropriate FPC/FFPC/LPC shall study each application and all relevant documentation and shall decide
whether the criteria have been met. In making the decision, the FPC/FFPC/LPC shall refer to:
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 108

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(a) Article 5.10 – Academic Qualifications
Guidelines
(b) Article 5.15 – Rights, Responsibilities and
Duties of Academics
(c) Article 5.50 – Assessment of a Member's
Performance
For appointment/promotion to the rank of Full
Professor/Librarian, the FPC/FFPC/LPC shall consider the assessment of the Member's scholarly activity as judged by
four (4) external referees. Two
(2) of these referees will be nominated by the applicant if the applicant so requests. Should the applicant fail to nominate
one (1) or both external referees, the Member’s Department/School will nominate the required referees. The additional
external referees shall be appointed by the Vice-
President, Academic after consultation with the
Department/School. All external evaluations shall come to FPC/FFPC/LPC duly signed by the author.
5.65.10 When the FPC/FFPC/LPC has completed its inquiries and deliberations it will forward its letter of recommendation
on the applicant’s application to the
Vice-President, Academic with a copy to the applicant. Except in the case of the applications for promotion to Full
Professor/Librarian, this shall be done by February 15. Each letter of recommendation on the applicant’s application shall
contain the following paragraph: "The Member may make written representations to the Vice-President, Academic within
ten (10) working days of the date on which the
FPC/FFPC/LPC forwards to the Member a copy of its letter of recommendation on the applicant’s application to the
Vice-President, Academic."
5.65.11 No later than March 7, the Vice-President, Academic shall confirm or reject the recommendation, or refer it back,
to the FPC/FFPC/LPC for further clarification of specified issues. In the case of referrals, the
Committee must re-examine and address the Vice-
President, Academic's concern no later than March
31.
5.65.12 The final decision of the Vice-President, Academic, whether or not to promote, shall be communicated in writing
with reasons to the Member with a copy to the Union by April 15 of the academic year in which the Member is considered
for tenure. The
FPC/FFPC/LPC and the Dean/University Librarian shall receive a copy of the letter sent to the Member.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 109

Collective Agreement 2008-11
In making a final decision, the Vice-President,
Academic shall take into consideration the written representations outlined in clause 5.65.10 above of the applicant to the
Vice-President, Academic. In cases of referrals, the Vice-President, Academic, in making a final decision, shall also take
into consideration the response of the FPC/FFPC/LPC to the specific concerns expressed.
5.65.13 In the case of Members at the rank of
Lecturer/General Librarian who are awarded a
Doctoral degree, they shall be promoted to the rank of
Assistant Professor/Librarian effective January 1 or
July 1 whichever next follows the award of the degree.
The Doctorate will be deemed to have been received when the individual can provide a diploma or a letter from the
university where the Doctorate is being obtained indicating that all the conditions for the
Doctorate, including the thesis defence and the corrections to the thesis, have been met. Members must supply a copy of
the diploma or of the letter to their Dean/University Librarian with a normal application form as well as an updated
curriculum vitae before the promotion procedures will be initiated.
In the case of librarians, Members must also demonstrate that they are holders of a Master's degree in Library Science if
their Doctorate is not in
Library Science.
ARTICLE 5.70 – PERSONNEL FILES
5.70.1 Official personnel files of a Member shall be kept by the appropriate Dean/University Librarian, with copy in the
office of the Vice-President, Academic. There shall be two (2) types of files for Members, active files and archival files.
Active files shall contain only information allowed under this Article. Archival files shall contain material which has been
banned for use in subsequent proceedings as in clauses 5.70.5 to
5.70.9 below but which the University requires for matters other than those related to this Collective
Agreement.
5.70.2 Members shall have the right to examine all of their personnel files during normal business hours, after notice in
writing, in the presence of the
Dean/University Librarian or a person authorised by the Dean/University Librarian. Material in the files which is to be held
confidential according to the provisions of this Collective Agreement will be removed from the files prior to their inspection
by the
Member. However, an inventory of this confidential material, certified by the Dean/University Librarian, will be provided to
the Member, such inventory shall
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 110

Collective Agreement 2008-11 identify all confidential documents by authorship (if appropriate), date and general subject
matter only.
5.70.3 Members may request the Vice-President, Academic to provide one (1) copy of their personnel file, excluding
confidential material according to the provisions of this Collective Agreement but including the inventory thereof. Such
requests will be filled within five (5) working days, at no charge to the
Member. One (1) copy of additions made subsequent to the initial copying may be requested under the same conditions
and terms. Requests for additional copies will be filled at the convenience of the
Vice-President, Academic.
5.70.4 No anonymous material concerning any Member shall be kept by the Employer for inclusion in the Member's
personnel file. Statistical summaries of student evaluations or written summaries of student comments unrelated to
Senate sanctioned course evaluations, such summaries to exclude anonymous comments, shall neither be considered
anonymous nor confidential and shall remain available when required by this Collective Agreement.
5.70.5 Members shall have the right to have all of their files supplemented or corrected in the event of error, or
inadequacy. In the event of alleged distortion,
Members shall have the right to provide additional material for inclusion in their personnel files. Members shall have the
right to request the removal from their personnel file of any false, irrelevant or unsubstantiated material. Such requests
shall be made through the Dean/University Librarian as appropriate and must be accompanied with reasons why the
material is false, irrelevant or unsubstantiated. In the event of refusal by the
Dean/University Librarian of such a request, the
Dean/University Librarian shall provide the Member with reasons why the material is true, relevant or substantiated, and
shall send a copy of that response to the Union. Members can grieve according to the provisions of this Collective
Agreement, providing only that such grievance is initiated within forty-five (45) working days of notification by the
Employer to the
Members that the material in dispute is to be included in their personnel file.
5.70.6 Letters of assessments received in relation to the appointment of a Member shall be confidential and shall not be
submitted as evidence in any subsequent proceedings against that Member.
5.70.7 Letters of reprimand are inadmissible evidence if used against a Member for any purpose when no further
disciplinary measures have been imposed on the
Member for two (2) subsequent academic years. In advance of any proceedings involving the Member,
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 111

Collective Agreement 2008-11 the Dean/University Librarian shall remove such letters from the Member's personnel file
and place them in a University depository. The Member shall be notified that this has been done.
5.70.8 All letters or assessments solicited by the
FPC/FFPC/LPC and any summaries thereof shall be kept confidential and used only for the purposes for which they were
solicited in any subsequent proceedings against that Member.
5.70.9 Student evaluations, in numerical or written form, shall not be admissible as evidence in any process involving a
Member's tenure, promotion or dismissal if such evaluations are more than five (5) years old.
5.70.10 A full copy of a Member's file, including all letters of reference and assessments except those excluded by the
provisions of this Collective Agreement, shall be made available to the FPC/FFPC/LPC and the Vice-
President, Academic at their request for the purpose of promotion and tenure evaluation. Such committees will treat the
file as confidential.
5.70.11 When confidential information is to be used by the
Employer in the course of proceedings to resolve a grievance, the detailed substance of such confidential information
shall be made available at least one (1) week in advance of the hearing to Members or their duly authorised
representative in a form which does not identify the author. For arbitration, reasonable efforts will be made to supply the
information as soon as practicable, subject to the above.
5.70.12 Where in the opinion of an arbitrator the identity of the author is central to the resolution of the difference, the
arbitrator shall be supplied with the information and may make use of it as essential to her/his decision while maintaining
the confidentiality thereof.
5.70.13 The Employer agrees not to release any individually identifiable information concerning a Member or
Members without the written consent of the
Member(s), except as provided for in Article 2.50 –
Information.
5.70.14 In the case of an appeal against dismissal, the contents of the official personnel file shall be made available to the
Member as a true copy if and when the formal grievance procedure has been initiated using the same protection of
confidentiality as stated in clause 5.70.11 above.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 112

Collective Agreement 2008-11
ARTICLE 5.75 – DISCIPLINARY MEASURES
5.75.1 Discipline of Members by the Employer shall be only for cause. Disciplinary action shall be just and reasonable and
be commensurate with the offense.
5.75.2 "Cause" for disciplinary measures shall include:
(a) Serious unprofessional behaviour.
(b) Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this Collective Agreement, minor technical violations excepted.
5.75.3 The following are the only formal "Disciplinary
Measures" which may be taken by the Employer against a Member:
(a) A letter of reprimand, specifying the grounds and adding this reprimand to the personnel file of the Member concerned;
(b) The withholding of an annual increment;
(c) The suspension without pay; the reduction in pay shall be computed as one two hundred and sixtieth (1/260) of normal
salary per day of suspension;
(d) The suspension with pay; if and only if the
Vice-President, Academic cites the suspension with pay as a disciplinary measure. It is understood that where a
suspension with pay is non-disciplinary such suspension shall not be referenced as disciplinary in any subsequent
disciplinary actions;
(e) The dismissal for just cause as per Article 5.80
– Dismissal Procedures.
5.75.4 When a Dean/University Librarian is satisfied following an investigation that there is cause to write a formal
reprimand the Dean/University Librarian shall do so directly, although the Member has the right of review as per Article
5.70 – Personnel Files.
5.75.5 When the Vice-President, Academic is satisfied following an investigation that there is cause to suspend a
Member, the Vice-President, Academic shall do so by written communication to the Member, setting out therein the
reasons therefore.
5.75.6 Cases involving the inability of a Member to perform reasonable duties by reason of physical or mental
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 113

Collective Agreement 2008-11 illness shall be treated separately from cases for disciplinary measures. If sickness or
disability is proven, leave shall be granted and the case dealt with within the University sickness and disability provisions.
In exceptional cases when behaviour providing grounds for disciplinary measures is judged to be due to illness and the
Member refuses to be placed under the sickness and disability provisions of this Collective Agreement, disciplinary
procedures may be initiated.
5.75.7 Grievances regarding disciplinary measures against
Sessional Members shall be dealt with by the procedures in clause 4.40.7 of Article 4.40 –
Withdrawal of Seniority for Sessional Members.
ARTICLE 5.80 – DISMISSAL PROCEDURES
5.80.1 "Dismissal" means the termination for just cause of a term appointment or a probationary appointment before the
end of the stated contractual period, or the termination of a tenure appointment for just cause at any time other than
normal retirement. Neither the failure to renew a term or probationary appointment at the end of the defined term nor the
decision not to grant tenure, nor termination of an appointment for the purpose of retirement, provided these actions are in
accordance with this Collective Agreement, constitutes dismissal.
5.80.2 Just cause shall be defined as:
(a) Gross misconduct including serious unprofessional behaviour and/or misconduct constituting a grave and direct
violation of the personal safety of another Member, members of the University community and/or students of the
University community;
(b) Persistent failure to discharge academic responsibilities as defined in this Collective
Agreement either through incompetence or neglect of duties including persistent neglect of duty to students or scholarly
professional pursuits.
5.80.3 (a) Cases involving the inability of a Member to perform reasonable duties by reason of physical or mental illness
shall be treated separately from cases of dismissal for just cause.
(b) Where such inability has been established, leave shall be granted and the case dealt with
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 114

Collective Agreement 2008-11 within the University sickness and disability provisions set out in Article 7.55 – Physical and
Mental Illness
(c) If the Member refuses to comply with the requirements of the University's sickness and disability provisions, e.g.
refuses a medical examination required by the Employer pursuant to Article 7.55 – Physical and Mental
Illness or policies of the company carrying the insurance or refuses the leave associated with these procedures, the
President may proceed to lay dismissal charges.
(d) If the President proceeds with dismissal for just cause, it shall be a sufficient defence to prevent dismissal for the
Member to establish that failure to perform reasonable duties arose from physical or mental illness.
(e) If Members are on sickness or disability leave and consider that they have recovered and are capable of undertaking
normal academic activities, they shall present medical evidence from a medical practitioner to their
Dean/University Librarian. If the
Dean/University Librarian agrees, the
Members shall be reinstated with full rights and benefits forthwith. If the Dean/University
Librarian disagrees, the Dean/University
Librarian shall require the opinion of two (2) additional medical practitioners named by agreement with the Member or, if
there is no agreement, by the Ontario Medical
Association. The majority opinion of the three
(3) medical practitioners shall prevail. The
Employer shall pay the cost of such additional medical examinations required by it.
Procedure for Dismissal
5.80.4 Where the Dean/University Librarian is satisfied that there is just cause to warrant dismissal proceedings, the
Dean/University Librarian shall make a recommendation, in writing to the President.
5.80.5 The President of the University may, by written notice for stated just cause, suspend Members with pay in
accordance with Article 5.75 – Disciplinary Measures from some or all of their University duties and withdraw some or all
of their University privileges, excluding membership in Senate, pending the initiation of dismissal procedures or
procedures related to physical or mental incapacity to perform reasonable duties (see clause 5.80.3 above). The stated
cause for suspension with pay must involve a situation perceived by the President as an immediate threat to the
functioning of the University or to any
Member of the University and/or be for the purpose of
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 115

Collective Agreement 2008-11 initiating an investigation. The suspension with pay shall terminate with the conclusion of
the dismissal or other proceedings or at such earlier time as the
President may deem appropriate. At which time, on a finding of just cause, the Member may be dismissed.
Salary and other benefits shall continue throughout the period of suspension.
5.80.6 If the President is satisfied that there is a prima facie case the President shall initiate dismissal proceedings in the
following manner. The President shall notify the
Member of the Dean's/University Librarian's recommendation and request that the Member meet with the President and
such person as the President may wish for a discussion of the case. In this and all further proceedings, an advisor may
accompany the
Member. If this attempt fails to settle the matter, or if the Member refuses to meet with the President, the
Member shall be informed by the President, in writing, by registered mail, of the reasons for the dismissal proceedings
against the Member in sufficient detail to enable the Member to prepare a response.
5.80.7 If the Member's whereabouts are unknown to the
Employer and the Union, the meeting contemplated in clause 5.80.6 above shall be dispensed with and the
President may immediately give notice of dismissal by registered mail addressed to the Member's last known address.
5.80.8 The Union is entitled to carry forward a grievance on behalf of the Member commencing at step 2 of the grievance
procedure.
ARTICLE 5.85 – RESIGNATION
5.85.1 Normally a Member may resign effective June 30 or
December 30, with at least three (3) month's written notice to the Vice-President, Academic. All leaves to which a
resigning Member would be entitled must be terminated at that date.
5.85.2 Employment may be terminated at any time by mutual written agreement between a Member and the Vice-
President, Academic.
5.85.3 Effective January 1, 2009, faculty members on a leave of absence at another university shall be deemed to have
resigned six (6) months after they receive tenure at that institution.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 116

Collective Agreement 2008-11
ARTICLE 5.90 – RETIREMENT
5.90.1 Normal Retirement Date
For the purpose of the administration of the pension plan, the normal retirement date of a Member shall be the first (1st)
day of July next following the attainment of age sixty-five (65), unless the
Member's sixty-fifth (65th) birthday falls on the first
(1st) day of July, in which case the Normal
Retirement Date shall coincide with the Member's sixty-fifth (65th) birthday. However, in accordance with government
statutes, retirement is not mandatory at that time.
5.90.2 Optional Retirement Dates
(a) Early Retirement
Early retirement shall be governed by the regulations of the Laurentian University Pension Plan or if applicable by the
terms of the Appendix C – Special
Voluntary Early Retirement Plan.
(b) Retirement at Dates Other than July 1
Subject to 5.90.2 (a) above and in exceptional circumstances a Member may request and the
Pension Committee may approve the request, retirement, at a date other than July 1. In this instance, an annuity shall be
purchased as of the next date the Employer will have available to it the evaluation of the total fund as of the day preceding
- that is, October 1, January 1, and April 1.
If such a request is made approved and implemented, only that Member's share of the net growth of the fund to the day
preceding will be allocated.
5.90.3 Members retired from this University shall retain:
(a) The right to their title and the listing of their name and their title in a special section at the back of the University
Calendar, until the death of the Member.
(b) The same library privileges as full-time
Members, free parking in facilities available to full-time Members, and such other University facilities as may be granted
by the
Vice-President, Academic at her/his discretion.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 117

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(c) The same exemption from tuition fees for themselves, their spouses, and their dependants as full-time Members, as
per
Article 8.50 – Tuition Fee Exemption and
Spousal Library Card.
(d) The same eligibility for free Physical Education
Centre membership for themselves, their spouses and their dependants as full-time
Members, as per Article 8.60 – Physical
Education Facilities.
5.90.4 To honour an outstanding contribution in an academic field, the Employer may, in accordance with Senate policy,
bestow the title of Professor/Librarian Emeritus upon a retiring Member.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 118

Collective Agreement 2008-11
RESEARCH, CREATIVITY AND PROFESSIONAL
DEVELOPMENT
ARTICLE 6.10 – RESEARCH AND CREATIVITY
6.10.1 The Parties recognize that the common good of society depends upon the unfettered search for knowledge in all
fields of study and upon its free exposition. The Parties further acknowledge the importance of research and creativity and
the
Employer will make every reasonable effort to support both in a fair and equitable manner.
6.10.2 The University is an open environment for the pursuit of scholarly work. Academic freedom and critical inquiry
depend on the communication of the findings and results of intellectual investigation.
The Employer shall not interfere with a Member’s freedom to publish the results of scholarly inquiry and research, except
for limitations imposed by duly constituted university Research Ethics Boards.
ARTICLE 6.15 – RESEARCH, CREATIVITY AND
DEVELOPMENT OFFICE
6.15.1 The Research, Creativity and Development (RCD)
Office has been created to facilitate research and/or creativity for all Members and to ensure that the internal and external
regulations concerning research activities are properly applied. The work of the RCD Office shall be done in a constructive
manner to give better access to funding and research collaboration at the national and international level, while promoting
research activities and creativity at Laurentian University.
6.15.2 For internally or externally-funded grant applications requesting a pre-selection or an evaluation, the
Employer shall communicate the composition of the selection committee on the RCD Office website.
The participation of Faculty Members in the selection committee shall be encouraged where possible. None of the
members of the selection committee shall be involved in the grant or contract applications being reviewed pursuant to
Article 3.35
– Conflict of Interest.
6.15.3 Members of the Administration shall not be involved as investigators in internal research grants and if they are
investigators in externally-funded grants that are internally pre-selected, they shall not be part of the selection committee
pursuant to Article
3.35 – Conflict of Interest.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 119

Collective Agreement 2008-11
6.15.4 The Employer shall endeavour to inform faculty
Members of any external competitions requiring
Employer matching funds, the policies, selection criteria, and an estimation of the likelihood of success concerning such
competitions.
ARTICLE 6.20 – RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
SUPPORT
6.20.1 In order to attract and retain faculty Members, all new full-time Members with probationary or tenured appointments
shall receive a minimum Start-up
Grant of eight thousand dollars ($8,000).
6.20.2 Recipients of these awards shall have three (3) years to use the funds. After a three (3) year period, any unspent
amount shall be returned to the
Office of the Vice-President, Academic.
ARTICLE 6.25 – LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY RESEARCH
FUND (LURF)
6.25.1 For each of the years of the Collective Agreement, the Employer shall provide to the Associate Vice-
President, Research a research fund to enhance scholarly productivity through an open competition among Members:
Research Support (LURF) as follows:
2008-09 $140,000
2009-10 $150,000
2010-11 $160,000
In the event that faculty from federated or affiliated universities wish to apply, their applications shall only be considered if
their home institution has contributed to the LURF fund an amount per full- time member equivalent to that provided by the
Employer.
6.25.2 For each of the years of the Collective Agreement, the Employer will provide to the Associate Vice-
President, Research an additional twenty thousand dollars ($20,000) per year to support both research activities and
attendance at academic and professional conferences by retired Members, through an open competition. The Employer
will also provide active assistance to LUFA-R members making grant applications to NSERC, SSHRC, and
CHIR.
6.25.3 A LURF Committee of eight (8) full-time Members, one (1) from Humanities, one (1) from Social
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 120

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Sciences, two (2) from Professional Schools, two
(2) from Sciences and Engineering, one (1) from
Management and one (1) Librarian will evaluate the proposals submitted to the Research, Creativity and
Development (RCD) Office once a year. These
Members will be appointed by the Dean/University
Librarian in consultation with the Union for a two (2) year term.
6.25.4 The LURF Committee shall establish its own procedures, and develop criteria for the administration of the funds.
These criteria shall be just, equitable and consistent with the objective of nurturing and stimulating research at Laurentian
University. The rules of this yearly competition shall be clearly established in consultation and agreement with the Union
and shall not be modified without the approval of the Union. The approved rules shall be treated as a public document and
posted on the RCD Office website. The funding criteria for LURF shall not be limited to, or give priority to, salaries for
assistants.
6.25.5 While the LURF committee should determine the amount of funding for each competition, in no case shall that
amount of funding be greater than five thousand dollars ($5,000) per application. The total
LURF funding shall be allocated by Faculty/Library, proportionate to the numbers of full-time Members in each
Faculty/Library.
6.25.6 The University shall maintain records and deposit copies of all proceedings, statements and correspondence
related to the Committee's policies and the awarding of grants. This material will be made available to the Union upon
request, subject to any limitations in the Freedom of Information and
Personal Privacy Act. Applicants who are not funded by LURF should be given an explanation by the LURF Committee on
the reasons of the rejection.
6.25.7 Applicants whose applications are rejected by the
LURF committee shall have recourse to an appeals procedure only in the case of allegations of violations of academic
freedom, significant procedural irregularities or discrimination. Notice of an appeal must be submitted to the
Dean/University
Librarian and RCD Office no later than one (1) month after the applicant has been notified of the decision. Within one (1)
week of receiving notice of appeal, the RCD Office shall strike an Appeals
Committee. Members of the Appeals Committee should be selected in light of research experience and expertise. The
Committee will consist of:
One (1) member appointed by the Union;
One (1) appointment by the Associate Vice-
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 121

Collective Agreement 2008-11
President, Research; and
A Chair chosen by the two (2) appointed members.
6.25.8 The Appeals Committee shall establish its own procedures taking into account the provisions of this
Article and the published policies and procedures for grant applications of the LURF Committee.
Should the appeal be upheld, the appellant’s request will be funded if there are funds still available. If not, the appellant
will be given first priority for funding at the next competition.
6.25.9 The decision of the Appeals Committee shall be final and binding on all Parties. The Appeals
Committee shall communicate its decision and its reasons in writing to the appellant and the RCD
Office of within one (1) month of hearing the appeal.
6.25.10 A list of all awardees including the project title, the amount of funding and the duration of all projects shall be
published on the RCD Office website after each competition.
ARTICLE 6.30 – PATENTS
6.30.1 The Employer agrees that the Members have the unqualified right to publish their inventions. The
Employer further agrees that the Members have no obligation to modify their research to enhance patentability nor, unless
otherwise agreed, any obligation to seek patent protection for the results of their scientific work.
6.30.2 The Employer waives, disclaims and abandons any interest in or claims to any invention, improvement, design or
development made by a Member or
Members except where this has occurred with the use of the Employer's funds, personnel or equipment in which instance
the conditions set out in clause
6.30.4 hereof shall apply. Unless otherwise provided in this Article, any invention or any patent arising therefrom shall be
the sole property of the inventor.
6.30.3 The Members shall have the right to make their own arrangements at their own expense to patent an invention
subject to the obligations in this Article and shall be entitled to all the proceeds therefrom except where the invention was
made with the use of the
Employer's funds, personnel or equipment.
6.30.4 Where an invention, improvement, design or development was made by Members with the use of the Employer's
funds, personnel or equipment the
Members shall sign an agreement with the University before an application for patent is filed by them. This agreement
shall provide that the Employer shall assign all rights, title and interest in the invention, improvement, design or
development to the
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 122

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Members, subject to the University and the Members sharing equally in the "net proceeds" as used in this
Article shall mean the net profits derived from licensing or commercialisation of the patented product, equipment or
process after deduction of all expenses incurred in patent searches, for obtained patent protection and for maintaining
said protection in Canada and in other countries.
6.30.5 Members agree to disclose the existence of any patent applications to the Employer within three (3) months of the
date of the application unless otherwise provided for in this Article and shall affirm in writing at that time whether or not the
discovery has been made and developed with the use of
Employer's funds, personnel or equipment. The
Employer may within one (1) month of receipt of the statement of the Member challenge in writing the assertion of the
Member in regard to the circumstances of the discovery, in which case the matter shall be settled by arbitration as
detailed in
Article 11.15 – Arbitration Procedure. Any challenge by the Employer shall be null and void unless received within the
above noted time limit. If the
Member(s) fails to disclose the existence of patent applications within three (3) months, it shall be understood that the
Employer maintains its rights under this Article until such disclosure is made.
Failure by the Employer to challenge the assertion of the Member within one (1) month shall constitute a waiver of any
rights that the Employer may have had in such discovery.
6.30.6 For the purpose of interpreting clauses 6.30.2 to
6.30.5 above, payment of regular salary and benefits shall not be construed as use of the Employer's funds.
6.30.7 Members shall grant to the Employer a non-exclusive, royalty free, irrevocable, indivisible, and non-transferable
right to use solely for the
University 's internal use any patented device, equipment or process when such device, equipment or process has been
invented with the use of the
Employer's equipment, funds or support/technical personnel. Such right, however, shall not include the right to transfer or
exploit any product or process.
6.30.8 Where Members decide that they will not patent, produce or market an invention, improvement or discovery at their
own expense but consent to the
University patenting, producing or marketing the invention, before an application for patent is filed by the University, the
University shall negotiate an agreement with the Members. The agreement shall provide that the Members shall assign all
their rights, titles and interests in the invention, improvement or discovery to the University subject to the University and
the Members sharing equally in the "net
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 123

Collective Agreement 2008-11 proceeds" derived therefrom.
6.30.9 Without mutual agreement, the name of the
University shall not be used in connection with inventions in which the Employer has no interest.
6.30.10 Any revenue that the Employer may receive from inventions shall be dedicated to academic development and
research with at least fifty percent
(50%) of such income designated for academic development and research in the Faculty/Library with which the inventor is
affiliated. These funds shall be maintained in a special account, which shall be open to the inspection of the President of
the Union or the
President of the Union's designate.
6.30.11 The Employer agrees that it shall not enter any agreement to sub-contract work or responsibilities already
undertaken or possessed by the Employer and the Members without securing to the Members who may be seconded to
or be employed by the sub-contractor all the rights, privileges and benefits accorded to them in this patent Article of this
Collective Agreement. Nor shall the Employer enter into any agreement to create a consortia of universities or
government departments or private companies for the purposes of research or development or commercial exploitation
without securing to the Members who may be seconded to or employed by such consortia, departments or private
companies all the rights, privileges and benefits accorded by this Article. If the Employer makes an agreement contrary to
this provision and fails to secure the said rights, privileges and benefits to said
Members, the agreement shall not apply to Members unless there is a special agreement in writing between the Employer
and the Union to waive this clause of the Article.
ARTICLE 6.35 – COPYRIGHT
Copyright vested in the Member:
6.35.1 The Member who is the creator of any work including any printed material, computer programmes, on-line course
material, painting, sculpture, film, slide, tape or similar material shall retain the copyright therein unless otherwise stated in
this Article.
Copyright vested in the University:
6.35.2 The Parties agree that the University shall hold copyright to any work including any creative work, printed material,
computer programme, on-line course material, films, slides, tapes or similar materials produced by Members as part of
their normal workload for the University for use in its distance education courses. In all cases, the
University shall arrange for the development of these
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 124

Collective Agreement 2008-11 courses through a special contract with the
Members, which sets out terms in accordance with the terms in this Collective Agreement. Copies of all works subject to
the policy stated in this clause shall contain a statement or marking identifying the ownership of copyright, and with
appropriate credit, the contributors. A copy of the contract between the
Member and the University shall be sent to the
Union.
6.35.3 If the University requests a work including a creative work, printed material, films, slides, tapes, computer
programmes, on-line course material, or similar materials from a Member under special contract, then, in the absence of
any agreement to the contrary, the University shall be the first owner of the copyright therein. This includes all materials
for distance education courses. A Member entering into such a contract with the University shall be notified of the terms of
this clause prior to signing the contract.
The Union shall receive a copy of such notification.
6.35.4 All special contracts for distance education courses shall contain a clause which allows the contributors to use (for
their own classroom purposes) parts of any course that they have created provided that they shall not use such material in
another distance education course without the written permission of the University during the period in which the
University holds copyright to that material.
6.35.5 The master copy of any work whose copyright is vested in the University under the terms of this Article shall be the
property of the University. The University shall be responsible for the custody and control of such works and of any copies
thereof.
6.35.6 Where consent, fees or licenses are required for the use of incorporated materials in works in which the
University has copyright under the terms of this
Article, the contributor shall notify the University by provision of a list of works which require such clearance. The
University shall have the right to refuse to accept requests for copyright clearance, which are judged to be prohibitively
expensive.
6.35.7 The Members who are the authors of any work, whose copyright is vested in the University shall sign a warranty
that the work is original and that, to the best of their knowledge, it does not violate any existing copyright.
6.35.8 The offering of courses to which the University has copyright under the terms of this Article shall be at the
University's discretion.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 125

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Revision:
6.35.9 From time to time, the University may require revisions in works to which it holds the copyright in order to ensure
that proper and current academic standards are met.
6.35.10 Further, the author of work as defined in clauses
6.35.2 or 6.35.3 above may, at any time after three
(3) years of use, and at three (3) year intervals thereafter notify the University of the need to revise such a work. The
University and the Member shall negotiate the amount it will pay to defray the costs of such revisions including the
Member's fee.
6.35.11 The process of revision shall be regarded as the joint responsibility of the author of the work and the
University. If the author chooses not to undertake the revision or if the author has not accepted the
University's request for revision within one (1) month of receipt of that request or if the author is no longer an Employee of
the University, then the
Department/School shall choose an individual to make the required revisions. By so doing, the author shall not lose
contractual rights to any fees. Where the author is no longer an Employee of the
University, notice of the intention to revise and of the proposed revisions shall be sent to her/him by registered mail at the
last known address. In the event that the author and the University cannot agree on the nature or extent of the revisions,
the University may engage the services of someone approved by the Department/School to make the revisions.
6.35.12 The University shall negotiate a fee for any revisions that are made at the University's request.
6.35.13 In all cases where someone other than the authors make revisions to the work, if the authors object to the extent
or the propriety of the revisions, they may have their names withdrawn as contributors to the work and any visible
indication that they are contributors to the work shall be withdrawn. The authors must notify the University of their desire
to do so within one (1) month after receiving notice by registered mail of the proposed revisions.
Third Party use:
6.35.14 "Net proceeds" of any fees or royalties that the
University receives for the use by another Party of a work to which the University has copyright under the terms of this
Article shall be distributed in accordance with clause 6.35.15 hereof and the Member shall receive no additional payment.
"Net Proceeds" shall mean the fees and royalties received less the cost of reproduction, administration and distribution.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 126

Collective Agreement 2008-11
6.35.15 Net proceeds shall be distributed as follows:
(a) Until the original production costs have been recouped by the University, seventy-five percent (75%) to the University
and twenty- five percent (25%) to the author.
(b) After recovery of the original production costs, fifty percent (50%) to the University and fifty percent (50%) to the
author.
"Original production costs" include the normal tariff charges to produce the physical work including licensing costs of other
copyright material exploited in the work. An accounting of production costs shall be produced by the University if
requested by the
Member or by the Union.
Member's Copy:
6.35.16 If practicable the Members shall receive, upon request, a copy at a cost not exceeding the cost of the
tape/film/recording or other medium upon which the work has been produced of any work produced by them for the
University and to which the University holds copyright under the terms of this Collective
Agreement.
6.35.17 Should the University wish to erase or otherwise destroy part or all of a work to which it has copyright under the
terms of this Collective Agreement, the authors shall be given notice of such intention and shall have one (1) month in
which to make known their wish to receive a copy of the section (s) to be erased. If the authors express such a wish within
the time limit, they shall receive a copy of those sections at a cost not exceeding the cost of the tape/film/recording or
other medium upon which the work has been produced plus reasonable administrative costs arising therefrom.
ARTICLE 6.40 – COMMITTEE ON PATENTS AND
COPYRIGHT
6.40.1 The Parties agree to create a continuing Committee on Patents and Copyright, which shall be composed of two (2)
individuals appointed by the Employer and two (2) Members appointed by the Union, with the
Chairship alternating between the Employer's representatives and the Union's representatives at each successive
meeting.
6.40.2 The Committee shall meet at least twice annually to:
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 127

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(a) Conduct such business as is referred to it.
(b) Consider strategies for marketing inventions, improvements or discoveries.
(c) Recommend to the Joint Committee on the
Administration of the Collective Agreement any proposals for modifications or changes in the patents and copyright
articles of this
Collective Agreement.
(d) Mediate any disputes arising out of Article
6.30 – Patents and Article 6.35 – Copyright in accordance with clause 6.40.3 below.
6.40.3 Grievance and Arbitration
For the purposes of this Collective Agreement, any grievance by a Member pertaining to Article 6.30 –
Patents and/or Article 6.35 – Copyright shall be handled in accordance with the following procedure:
(a) The Member, within three (3) weeks of the event giving rise to the grievance or the date on which the Member knew or
reasonably should have known of such event if that date is later, shall present a grievance to the
Vice-President, Academic.
(b) Within two (2) weeks of receipt of the grievance, the Vice-President, Academic shall refer the matter to the continuing
Committee on Patents and Copyright and inform the
Union of such grievance. If the
Vice-President, Academic fails to refer the matter to the continuing Committee on
Patents and Copyright within the time limits, the Members shall be deemed to have succeeded in their grievance and the
results thereof shall be binding on the university.
(c) The continuing Committee on Patents and
Copyright, within one (1) month of the receipt of the grievance, shall make a recommendation for the resolution of the
grievance. The time limits may be extended by mutual agreement. If the committee fails to make a recommendation within
the time limits, the Vice-President, Academic may act as in paragraph 6.40.3 (d) below.
(d) The Vice-President, Academic within one (1) week of the receipt of the recommendations of the continuing Committee
on Patents and
Copyright or within one (1) week of the end of the time limits for action by the Committee shall render the Committee's
proposal in the matter and communicate it in writing to the
Parties concerned.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 128

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(e) If the proposal of the Vice-President,
Academic rendered pursuant to paragraph
6.40.3 (d) above does not resolve the grievance, the matter may be submitted to binding arbitration by one (1) arbitrator in
accordance with the grievance and arbitration procedures of this Collective Agreement.
ARTICLE 6.45 – PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
EXPENDITURES
6.45.1 In order to further the objectives of the University, the creation and dissemination of knowledge, the activities of
each full-time Member shall be supported by professional expenditures in each contractual year. The amount of these
expenditures shall be limited to two thousand two hundred dollars
($2,200) for the academic year 2008-09, two thousand two hundred and fifty dollars ($2,250) for the academic year
2009-10, and two thousand three hundred dollars ($2,300) for the academic year 2010-11.
6.45.2 Professional development expenditures allowable under this Article include the following:
(a) Membership fees for professional and/or learned societies related to the Member’s discipline.
(b) Subscriptions to professional and/or learned journals.
(c) Books, materials, equipment, and services directly related to research and teaching/professional Library work.
(d) Registration fees for the Member to attend a scholarly conference.
(e) Travel including transportation, food and accommodation (subject to University travel policies) for the Member to
attend relevant scholarly conferences or seminars, or to visit other universities or research sites to conduct research and
scholarly work which cannot be done at Laurentian University.
(f) Page and reprint charges or costs incurred in the preparation and completion of scholarly manuscripts.
(g) Professional/academic development or upgrading.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 129

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(h) Hiring part-time assistants in support of research and teaching, excluding marking.
6.45.3 Expenditures must be approved in advance by the
Dean/University Librarian and reimbursements will be made on verification of receipts. In the event that expenditures are
incurred in relatively small amounts - less than fifty percent (50%) of the total or less than the remaining maximum
allowable amount - reimbursements should be accumulated but receipts must be submitted not later than
January 1 or July 1 following the date the expenditures have been made.
6.45.4 Full-time Members who are on sabbatical leave, study leave, or voluntary reduced workload are eligible for the
professional development expenditures.
6.45.5 Any equipment purchased with funds provided under this Article remains the property of the
University but a Member shall have the right if she/he so chooses to buy back such equipment at fair market value.
6.45.6 Any unused portion of the maximum allowed for professional development can be carried forward for two (2) years
only.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 130

Collective Agreement 2008-11
LEAVES
ARTICLE 7.10 – RECOGNIZED AND OTHER HOLIDAYS
7.10.1 The following days and all days generally declared to be recognised holidays by Federal or Provincial authorities
are recognised holidays and paid time off shall therefore be given to the Members on:
(a) Founder's Day, Good Friday, Easter Monday,
Victoria Day, Canada Day, August Civic
Holiday, Labour Day, Thanksgiving Day,
Christmas Day, Boxing Day, New Year's Day.
(b) And on such other holidays as declared by the Employer, including the customary
Christmas recess.
ARTICLE 7.15 – VACATION
7.15.1 Vacation is the period during which a Member is not accountable to the University.
7.15.2 In addition to recognised holidays, each Member is entitled to a vacation of twenty-five (25) working days, after
eleven (11) months of service and annually thereafter. Members on contracts of less than one (1) year duration are
entitled to a pro-rated period of vacation. When Members have accumulated five (5) full consecutive years of employment
at the University, for each year of employment thereafter they shall be entitled to an additional two (2) days of vacation to
a maximum entitlement of thirty-five (35) working days.
7.15.3 The Members will be paid during vacation periods but there shall be no remuneration in lieu of vacation in the
event that the Members choose not to take their vacation allowance.
7.15.4 The Members are required to take the vacation to which they are entitled. Vacation may not be accumulated from
year to year. The Members are required to take their vacation between Spring
Convocation and Labour Day, unless prior permission has been granted by the Dean/University
Librarian. Members may take their annual vacation at any time within that period provided that:
(a) The period of the vacation does not conflict with a time during which the Members have scheduled duties assigned to
them.
(b) The Members have indicated the dates of their vacation to the Dean/University
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 131

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Librarian, through their Chair/Director at least one (1) month in advance.
7.15.5 In the event of the death of Members, the value of any unused vacation entitlement will be paid to their beneficiary.
7.15.6 Members retiring, resigning or whose limited-term appointment expires but who are unable to take their full
vacation entitlement shall be paid vacation pay as follows:
(a) Members retiring or resigning or whose limited-term appointments expire on June 30 shall be paid a number of
working days equal to their vacation entitlement minus the number of working days in June that fall after the deadline for
submission of final grades.
Members are considered to be on vacation starting on the first working day after Spring
Convocation.
(b) Members retiring or resigning on December
31 shall be paid a number of working days equal to their vacation entitlement minus the number of working days that fall
after the deadline of submission of final grades for three (3) credit courses and mid-term grades for six (6) credit courses,
and December 31
(c) Members with limited-term appointments whose appointment expires on dates other than June 30 shall be paid a
number of working days equivalent to their vacation entitlement minus the number of working days that fall after the
deadline for submission of final grades and the date of the expiry of the term contract.
(d) The daily rate applied to the entitlements
(paragraphs 7.15.6 (a) to (c) above) shall be one two hundred and sixtieth (1/260) of the
Member’s salary.
ARTICLE 7.20 – ABSENCE - GENERAL
7.20.1 The University as a community of scholars requires the availability of its Members on a regular and on-going basis
to ensure that the activities of the
University scheduled and unscheduled can be carried out in an orderly manner.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 132

Collective Agreement 2008-11
7.20.2 Any absence shall not normally interfere with assigned and/or scheduled activities and the harmonious functioning
of the Department/School.
7.20.3 Any absence from campus affecting teaching/professional librarian duties shall be governed by Article 5.15 –
Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of Academics.
7.20.4 From Labour Day to Spring Convocation absences of more than one (1) week require notification to the
Chair/Director and permission of the Dean/University
Librarian. Shorter absences require notification to the Chair/Director. When scheduled or assigned duties are affected by
an absence, Members shall make suitable arrangements through their
Chair/Director who shall advise the Dean/University
Librarian when the absence has a significant impact on the Member's duties.
7.20.5 From Spring Convocation to Labour Day,
Departments/Schools must maintain a fair and equitable system to assure a reasonable presence sufficient to administer
the Department/School, to deal with correspondence and to maintain on-going availability for student counselling and
other unscheduled issues as they may from time to time arise. Absences during this period must be in accordance with
this system. For any absences of more than a week, prior written permission shall be obtained from the Dean/University
Librarian who shall not unreasonably withhold such permission.
7.20.6 Except where Members are on vacation, leave or other approved absence they must remain in communication with
their Department/School so that it is reasonably possible for the University to contact and/or recall them on short notice.
7.20.7 It may in exceptional cases, be necessary for the
University to recall a Member who is on vacation, leave or formally approved absence as defined in clause 7.20.5 above.
The University will not do so arbitrarily or unreasonably. In such cases, the
University will bear reasonable transportation costs consequent upon any such recall.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 133

Collective Agreement 2008-11
ARTICLE 7.25 – SABBATICAL LEAVES
7.25.1 Preamble
In recognition of the fact that full-time Members are required to continue to develop as scholars and researchers
throughout their careers, the University maintains a policy of sabbatical leave intended for academic study, research or
writing which will be mutually beneficial to the Member and the institution. For this purpose, sabbatical leave is defined as
a period during which a Member is relieved of normal duties in order to:
(a) Engage in further training, advanced studies or courses at a study or research centre, including language study.
(b) Devote more time to scientific or creative work.
(c) Improve the University's relations with other universities or countries in the capacity of a visiting professor or visiting
librarian.
(d) Gain practical or professional experience in a field connected with the Members' academic or professional
specialization which will enable them to give instruction or, in the case of the library, service that is more complete and
suitable to the requirements of the time.
Members who are on sabbatical leave and who elect to remain on campus for all or part of the duration of the leave shall
not normally be assigned any formal workload nor shall they normally participate in any formal activities of the University
other than those required by this Collective
Agreement. Members who have indicated in their sabbatical plan their intent to spend part or all of their sabbatical leave
on campus are entitled to suitable office space on campus. Sabbaticants required to move their offices shall have all
moving and storage expenses paid by the Employer. The
Employer will replace Members on sabbatical leave when it deems it necessary. The Employer retains the right to limit the
number granted leave in keeping with its academic responsibilities.
7.25.2 Eligibility
Eligibility for sabbatical leave is subject to the following conditions:
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 134

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(a) Members must have been full-time faculty
Members of the University for the past six (6) consecutive years, holding the rank of Full
Professor/Librarian, Associate
Professor/Librarian, and Assistant
Professor/Librarian at the time of application.
They must be tenured at the time their sabbatical leave begins. In exceptional circumstances tenured Lecturers/General
Librarians with the requisite years at
Laurentian are also eligible for sabbatical if they have the approval of the
Dean/University Librarian to apply. Where the leave is to be used for upgrading, the
University shall give special consideration to employment equity goals. Faculty Members' service for purposes of
sabbatical leave eligibility shall be calculated from the date of their initial full-time appointment by the
University or from the date of their last sabbatical leave, whichever is later. When
Members take a sabbatical leave, all accumulated years of eligibility entitlement are exhausted unless otherwise provided
for in this Collective Agreement. Time spent on sabbatical leave, study leave, or leave without pay does not count towards
sabbatical eligibility. Sabbatical leave will not be automatic and shall be granted following an approved application
procedure, outlined below.
(b) In order to attract qualified faculty, the Vice-
President, Academic may from time to time grant credit towards a sabbatical leave for full-time faculty service at another
University, including service at a Federated or Affiliated
College of a University. Such entitlement will be specified in the initial letter of appointment.
(c) Under special circumstances, the Members may make application for leave one (1) year prior to the year in which they
would normally become eligible to take sabbatical leave. If sabbatical leave is granted in this instance, the Members will
receive a stipend of eighty percent (80%) of their salary.
(d) In the interests of effective scheduling of a
Department’s/School’s course offerings, the
Dean/University Librarian may request that
Members apply for their sabbatical leave after the completion of five (5) years. The
Dean/University Librarian shall make the
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 135

Collective Agreement 2008-11 request by May 1 of the academic year preceding the year in which the Members are being
requested to apply for sabbatical leave, and the Members shall respond to the
Dean's/University Librarian's request by
June 1. Should the Members accept, the
Members shall submit a sabbatical plan by
September 30 to the Chair/Director of the
Department/School, as per paragraph 7.25.3
(b) below. Should Members accept, and if the application is approved, the Members shall receive a stipend of eighty-five
percent
(85%) of their salary during the sabbatical leave.
7.25.3 Application
(a) Each Dean/University Librarian shall maintain and annually revise, in consultation with the Department/School, a
sabbatical eligibility plan for each Department/School, the purpose of which is solely to assist in the orderly planning of
sabbatical leaves. Copies of the plan will be distributed by July 1 of each year to the Chair/Director who shall forward one
to each Department/School
Member.
(b) Applications for sabbatical leave shall be submitted by the Members to their
Dean/University Librarian with a copy to
Chair/Director of the Department/School no later than September 30 of the academic year preceding.
(c) The Dean/University Librarian shall make her/his recommendation to the Vice-
President, Academic no later than November
15 of the academic year preceding that in which the leave is to be taken. After verifying the status of the application in
relation to criteria defined in clauses 7.25.1 and 7.25.2 above, and after taking into consideration the recommendation of
the Dean/University
Librarian, the Vice-President, Academic shall reach a decision and shall transmit it to the
Member no later than December 15 of the academic year preceding that in which the leave is to be taken.
(d) The Vice-President, Academic shall base her/his decision to approve or not to approve a sabbatical plan on the
academic merits of the sabbatical leave project and its value to the professional development of the Member and to the
University.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 136

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(e) Should Members wish to make subsequent changes in their sabbatical plan, they shall submit the proposed changes
to their respective Dean/University Librarian for prior approval. If the proposed changes are not approved by the
Dean/University Librarian after consultation with the
Department/School, Members may ask that they be submitted to the Vice-President,
Academic for approval.
(f) The Dean/University Librarian may refer back the application submitted by the
Member as per paragraph 7.25.3 (b) above or the application for change as per paragraph 7.25.3 (e) above. If referred
back, the applicant shall consider the
Dean/University Librarian's suggestions and will re-submit a new application within ten
(10) working days.
7.25.4 Postponement
(a) In the event that it is necessary on financial and/or program grounds for the
Dean/University Librarian to require postponement of a sabbatical leave, the
Members shall be informed by July 1 of the academic year preceding that in which the sabbatical is to be taken. Such a
postponement shall not be required unreasonably. In such a case, Members shall receive an additional five percent (5%)
of their regular salary for the year of postponement as "stipend" during their sabbatical year and shall receive one (1) year
of sabbatical credit for the year postponed so that their next sabbatical leave will occur according to their original
sabbatical rotation. A sabbatical leave cannot be postponed for more than three (3) years on financial or program
grounds.
(b) (i) In the event that Members wish to postpone application for leave, they shall do so only for valid reasons, and
permission to do so shall be sought from the appropriate Dean/University
Librarian no later than May 1 immediately preceding the deadline for application specified in paragraph
7.25.3 (b) above. Such permission shall not be unreasonably withheld.
Should Members with a sabbatical leave confirmed by the Vice-
President, Academic wish to postpone the leave for valid reasons, permission shall be sought from the
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 137

Collective Agreement 2008-11 appropriate Dean/University Librarian at least two (2) months prior to the planned
commencement of such leave. Such permission shall not be unreasonably withheld.
(ii) If postponement of application for leave or of approved leave is approved, such Members do not have right of
precedence over colleagues in the
Department’s/School’s sabbatical leave plan. Such Members shall receive one (1) year of sabbatical credit for the year
postponed so that their next sabbatical leave will occur according to their original sabbatical rotation. In no case may such
a postponement be for more than one
(1) year.
(c) In the event that a Member’s tenure process is delayed for reasons of illness, pregnancy, parental or adoption leave,
such Members shall receive one (1) year of sabbatical credit for the year delayed so that their next sabbatical leave will
occur according to their original sabbatical rotation.
(d) Except in extenuating circumstances, where
Members postpone a sabbatical leave without formal approval, they lose the right of precedence over colleagues in the
Department’s/School’s sabbatical leave plan.
Should such Members be required by the
Dean/University Librarian on financial and/or program grounds to postpone their sabbatical leave in the following
academic year, they shall not be entitled to any additional remuneration.
(e) Except in extenuating circumstances, where
Members fail to apply for sabbatical leave for which they are eligible to apply, they shall not be entitled to any additional
remuneration should they be required to postpone their sabbatical leave in the following academic year on financial and/or
program grounds.
(f) If Members' sabbatical proposals are rejected on academic grounds by the Vice-
President, Academic and/or Arbitration
Board, they are entitled to apply the following year, but they are not entitled to any additional remuneration.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 138

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(g) Deadlines may be waived by agreement of the Parties.
7.25.5 Duration
Members may elect a sabbatical leave for a period of:
(a) Six (6) months normally commencing either on the first (1st) day of July or the first (1st) day of January. or
(b) Twelve (12) months normally commencing on the first (1st) day of July or such other date as agreed to by their
respective
Dean/University Librarian. Such agreement shall not be unreasonably withheld.
7.25.6 Remuneration
(a) A Member taking a six (6) month sabbatical leave after six (6) years of accumulated sabbatical credit is entitled to full
salary.
(b) Members taking a twelve (12) month sabbatical leave after six (6) years of accumulated sabbatical credit are entitled
to a stipend equivalent to eighty-five percent
(85%) of the salary they would normally have received.
(c) Upon the Member's request, the University will provide a portion of the sabbatical leave stipend as a research grant
subject to provincial and federal regulations. A Member who receives such a research grant from the
University must make the necessary deductions and declarations as applicable under either the federal or provincial laws.
The University accepts no responsibility in this regard.
(d) A Member on sabbatical leave shall not take other paid appointments without the prior written permission of the
Dean/University
Librarian. Such permission shall not be unreasonably withheld. Normally, any additional remuneration received during the
leave will be limited to an amount which brings a Member's total to one hundred percent (100%) of normal salary, plus
travel and related expenses for the Member's spouse and dependant children. Where total remuneration exceeds this
amount, the
University reserves the right to reduce the
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 139

Collective Agreement 2008-11 sabbatical stipend proportionately.
(e) Members who will have accumulated unused sabbatical credit by the time of their normal retirement date will be
entitled to apply for a sabbatical leave to occur during their penultimate year before retirement, and on the understanding
that they will return to the
University for their final year. Should sabbatical leave be granted in such circumstances, Members are entitled to a
stipend pro-rated on the basis of the normal sabbatical stipend and shall include entitlement for the year of return. At their
discretion, the Dean/University Librarian may agree to pro-rate the period of time taken as sabbatical leave in lieu of a
pro-rated stipend.
7.25.7 Benefits
(a) During the period of sabbatical leave, the
Member shall continue to receive all benefits as per Article 8.45 – Benefits subject to the conditions set out therein.
(b) During a sabbatical leave, pension calculations shall be based on the Member's salary that would have been in effect if
the
Member had not been on sabbatical.
7.25.8 Vacation
All Members on sabbatical leave will be assumed to have used their prior year's annual vacation entitlement during the
period July 1 to June 30 of the academic year in which the sabbatical leave is taken. Furthermore, Members who take a
six (6) month sabbatical leave shall be deemed to have taken half of their annual vacation entitlement during the actual
period of the sabbatical leave.
Members will be entitled to one (1) year's vacation entitlement after June 30 of the year in which the sabbatical leave is
completed.
7.25.9 Return
(a) Members granted sabbatical leave shall undertake to return to the University to resume their responsibilities as a
full-time
Member of faculty for the period of at least one (1) year. Failure to return to the
University shall require the Member to reimburse the University for all of the salary and benefits received during the leave,
except as such obligations may be waived
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 140

Collective Agreement 2008-11 by the University.
However, when a Member is planning to retire in the academic year immediately following the Member’s sabbatical leave,
the
Employer may waive the requirement to return to her/his responsibilities. Also, to facilitate earlier retirement, the Employer
and the Member may agree to an early sabbatical leave as per paragraph 7.25.2 (c) above without financial penalty
following which the Member retires and is not required to return to her/his responsibilities. In both these situations,
agreement of the Employer is required.
(b) Members must prepare and forward to their
Dean/University Librarian, within one (1) month of their return, a full written account of their scholarly and professional
activities and accomplishments as per the approved sabbatical plan during the leave. Members may make a written
request to the
Dean/University Librarian for a delay in the date of submission of their report. This report shall become part of their file to
be used in evaluating the Member for salary increments and promotions. Failure of a Member to submit the sabbatical
report by the specified time limit without adequate explanation may result in the delay of the decision whether to award or
deny the annual increment as per clause 8.20.11 of Article 8.20 – Procedures for the Award/Denial of a
Progress-Through-
The-Ranks Increment.
Members who are not eligible for an annual increment must have their report submitted within one (1) month of their
return in order to begin to accumulate sabbatical credit without penalty. When Members fail to do so, sabbatical credit
shall not begin to accumulate until January 1 or July 1, whichever is the closest date next following submission of the
report. If, after reviewing the report, the Dean/University Librarian finds the performance to be unsatisfactory, appropriate
measures may be taken, as provided in Article 5.75 – Disciplinary
Measures and 5.80 – Dismissal Procedures.
(c) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph
7.25.9 (a) above, the University may grant up to a maximum of one (1) year of study leave to Members immediately
following the completion of their sabbatical leave provided
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 141

Collective Agreement 2008-11 that during this sabbatical leave the
Members were studying to obtain a
Doctorate, and the additional year of leave will allow them to continue the program for the Doctorate. Under exceptional
circumstances, upon recommendation of the
Member's Dean/University Librarian and with the permission of the Vice-President,
Academic, the study leave may be extended for an additional year. This back-to-back sabbatical/study leave shall be
granted to
Members only once in their academic career. The Members shall receive a stipend, according to the provisions of Article
7.30 – Study Leave during this study leave, and must return to the University for a period equal to the total leave or, in the
alternative, reimburse the University for the full amount of the stipend and benefits received during the period of combined
sabbatical/study leave.
The Member may request an altered pattern for the payment of the combined sabbatical/study leave stipends provided
that the payment in any one year may not exceed the stipend originally awarded for the sabbatical year.
7.25.10 Disability
In the event that a Member on sabbatical leave becomes unable to fulfil the sabbatical obligations because of disability
the following policies and procedures shall apply.
(a) The Member will advise the Dean/University
Librarian, as soon as possible under the circumstances, of the disability and will provide the Dean/University Librarian with
a physician's report outlining the extent of the disability and if possible the expected date of return. For the duration of the
illness the provisions of Article 7.55 – Physical and
Mental Illness shall apply.
(b) In the event that the sabbaticant is disabled from performing her/his tasks for less than fifty percent (50%) of the
sabbatical leave, the Member shall be deemed to have taken her/his sabbatical leave. The Member shall submit a report
on her/his sabbatical activities on completion of the sabbatical leave or at the end of the sick leave, whichever occurs
later. The impact of the illness on the sabbatical plan of the Member shall be taken into consideration at evaluation time.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 142

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(c) In the event that the Member is disabled from performing her/his tasks for more than fifty percent (50%) of the
sabbatical leave, the Member shall be deemed not to have taken a sabbatical leave. The Member shall be eligible to take
her/his sabbatical leave at the first mutually acceptable time. If the
Member indicates that she/he will carry out the previously approved sabbatical plan then the Dean/University Librarian, on
the advice of the Department/School and in consultation with the Member, will determine the date on which the sabbatical
leave will commence. In the event that the Member wishes to amend the sabbatical plan, the provisions of paragraph
7.25.3 (f) above shall apply.
7.25.11 Sabbatical Leave After Three Years
While sabbaticals after six (6) years are the norm, the Parties recognize that outside of the sabbatical eligibility plan,
which will take precedence, it may be mutually beneficial to Members and the University if
Members were to take a six (6) month sabbatical at eighty-five percent (85%) salary after three (3) years of service. For
each six (6) months of service beyond three (3) years the sabbaticant is eligible for an additional two and a half percent
(2.5%) of salary during the leave period. In no case may a proposed or approved sabbatical leave after three
(3) years be postponed for more than one (1) year.
When Members take a sabbatical leave after three
(3) years all accumulated years of eligibility are exhausted except as otherwise provided for by this
Collective Agreement. When the sabbatical leave is postponed, the Member shall receive one (1) year sabbatical credit
for the year postponed so that their next sabbatical leave will occur according to their original sabbatical rotation.
Sabbaticals after three
(3) years can be granted provided that:
Eligibility
(a) Members have tenure when the leave becomes effective.
(b) Such a leave does not require the postponement of a sabbatical leave for a
Member with six (6) or more years of service.
(c) The leave does not have a negative impact on the budget of the Department/School.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 143

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Return
(a) Members granted sabbatical leave under this Article shall undertake to return to the
University to resume responsibilities as a full-time Member of faculty for the period of at least six (6) months. Failure to
return to the University shall require the Member to reimburse the University for all of the salary and benefits received
during the leave, except as such obligations may be waived by the University.
However, when a Member is planning to retire in the academic year immediately following the Member’s sabbatical leave,
the
Employer may waive the requirement to return to her/his responsibilities. Also, to facilitate earlier retirement, the Employer
and the Member may agree to an early sabbatical leave as per paragraph 7.25.2 (c) above without financial penalty
following which the Member retires and is not required to return to her/his responsibilities. In both these situations, the
Employer has to agree.
(b) Members must prepare and forward to their
Dean/University Librarian and Chair/Director of the Department/School, within one (1) month of their return, a full written
account of their scholarly and professional activities and accomplishments as per the approved sabbatical plan during the
leave, as outlined in paragraph 7.25.9 (b) above.
ARTICLE 7.30 – STUDY LEAVES
A leave for the purpose of upgrading academic qualifications, normally through the attainment of a higher degree or some
other equivalent acceptable to the University and the Department/School shall be known as Study Leave. Such leave
must be in the best interests of the University. The maximum length of leaves to be granted during a Member's academic
career shall normally not exceed two (2) years.
7.30.1 Eligibility
A study leave may be granted to a tenured, probationary or Permanent Sessional Member after two (2) years of full-time
service, but no sooner than two (2) years after a sabbatical leave except as permitted in paragraph 7.25.9 (c) of Article
7.25 –
Sabbatical Leaves. Such leave will not be automatic and shall be granted only upon the approval by the
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 144

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Vice-President, Academic, subsequent to consultation with the Department/School through its
Chair/Director and the appropriate Dean/University
Librarian, upon an approved application procedure noted below. In the event that the Employer is unable to grant a study
leave to an applicant in one (1) given year, the Employer shall make every reasonable effort to ensure that the study leave
is granted to the
Member in the subsequent year of application.
7.30.2 Application
(a) Applications for study leave shall be made by
September 30 in consultation with the
Department/School through the Chair/Director and the appropriate Dean/University Librarian to the Vice-President,
Academic. In submitting an application for study leave, the
Members shall provide a well-considered plan indicating the value of the leave to their professional improvement and to
the best interest of the University. In forwarding the application to the Dean/University Librarian, the Department/School
through the
Chair/Director shall recommend for or against approval, including in the recommendation not only an assessment of the
project but also a judgement on how the leave, if granted, will affect the academic program(s) and the budget of the
particular Department/School.
In forwarding the application to the
Vice-President, Academic, the
Dean/University Librarian shall make an assessment of the application on the same grounds. The Dean/University
Librarian will, at the Dean/University Librarian's discretion, make whatever inquiry they deem desirable, including
consideration of the applicant's demonstrated potential, in order to determine the merit of the application. Copies of both
the Department/School's and the
Dean’s/University Librarian's recommendations shall be made available to the applicant.
(b) Applications for study leave shall be filed with the Vice-President, Academic no later than
October 31 of the academic year preceding that in which the leave is to be taken. The
Vice-President, Academic shall verify the status of the application in relation to the relevant University policies and the
financial implications of the leave, and make a decision, a copy of which shall be sent to the
Member. The decision of the Vice-President,
Academic shall be final and binding.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 145

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(c) In the event that the Vice-President,
Academic finds it necessary to refuse
Members their study leave on financial grounds after the leave had been approved, that Member shall be given priority
within the
Member's Department/School for a study leave for the following year.
(d) Deadlines listed above may be waived in special circumstances.
7.30.3 Terms
(a) A one (1) year study leave may be granted to a tenured, probationary or Permanent
Sessional Member after two (2) years of service at a stipend of thirty-five thousand
($35,000) or a pro-rated amount if the leave is for a period of less than one (1) year.
(b) A two (2) year study leave may be granted to a tenured, probationary or Permanent
Sessional Member after four (4) years of service at a stipend of thirty-five thousand
($35,000) per year.
(c) A Member may request a temporary reduction in workload to undertake or complete Doctoral studies. Where, in the
discretion of the Vice-
President, Academic and upon recommendation of the Dean/University
Librarian, satisfactory replacement arrangements can be made, the workload reduction will be granted with a
proportionate reduction in salary based on the overload stipend.
(d) The maximum period of absence is two (2) consecutive years, normally commencing on
July 1.
(e) In the event that Members wish to pursue a summer course for upgrading purposes, they may request up to four (4)
weeks at full pay if they contribute equal time from their vacation period without losing any of their study leave entitlement.
To apply for such a leave,
Members will follow the procedures set out in clause 7.30.2 above.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 146

Collective Agreement 2008-11
7.30.4 Benefits
Benefits of insurance, pension, etc., will continue during the leave provided the Members continue payment of their
portion of the fees.
7.30.5 Return
(a) The Members must agree in writing to return immediately to the University for a period equal to their leave of absence
but in no case for a period of less than one (1) year or to reimburse the University for the full amount of the stipend
received. If Members return to the University for a period of time less than the length of the leave, the University shall
require the Members to reimburse the
University for all or part of their stipend received during the leave.
(b) The Members must prepare and forward to their Dean/University Librarian and
Chair/Director of the Department/School, within one (1) week of their return, a full written account of their scholarly
activities during the study leave. The report shall become part of their personnel file.
(c) Time spent on study leave does not count towards sabbatical credit.
7.30.6 Appointments while on Leave
All Members on study leave must obtain written approval in advance from the Dean/University
Librarian for any paid activity before making any such commitment.
ARTICLE 7.35 – VOLUNTARY REDUCED WORKLOAD
7.35.1 The Employer and the Union endorse the principle of voluntary reduced workload as being mutually beneficial to
the Members and the institution. Any full-time Member of the Bargaining Unit who currently occupies a regular full-time
position and who has a minimum of two (2) years of continuous full-time service at the University at their request may be
granted up to fifty percent (50%) temporary reduction in workload with a proportionate reduction in salary, and annual
vacation entitlement, provided that:
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 147

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(a) The temporary reduction is effective for a twelve (12) month period.
(b) The request is normally made to the
Department/School and the Dean/University
Librarian three (3) months in advance.
(c) The Dean/University Librarian approves the request, such approval not to be unreasonably withheld.
7.35.2 Notwithstanding paragraph 7.35.1 (a) above, the
University may, upon request, grant voluntary reduced workloads for periods longer than twelve
(12) months and/or renewals of twelve (12) month reduction periods, subject to the Dean’s/University
Librarian's approval as in paragraph 7.35.1 (c) above.
7.35.3 Faculty Members on Voluntary Reduced Workload have the right to benefits and to contribute to the benefits plan
of the University in accordance with the provisions of the Collective Agreement for sharing contributions.
(a) Sick leave. Members will be covered for periods of sick leave to the extent of the actual salary paid during that period
as per
Article 7.55 – Physical and Mental Illness.
(b) Long-Term Disability. Members who are planning to take a voluntary reduced workload must be provided with specific
information concerning coverage for Long-Term Disability during and after the period of voluntary reduced workload.
Members should not accept voluntary reduced workload without a full and complete written statement concerning
Long-Term Disability coverage.
(c) Pension Plan. Members on voluntary reduced workload may contribute to the pension plan on the basis of their normal
full salary with appropriate contributions from the
Employee and Employer as outlined in the
Collective Agreement to the extent possible under Revenue Canada regulations. It is understood that contributions based
on normal salary rather than reduced salary may
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 148

Collective Agreement 2008-11 not be possible under Revenue Canada regulations for a cumulative total of more than five
(5) years.
(d) Life Insurance. Life insurance may be carried based on the Member's normal salary and normal maximum.
(e) Sabbatical Leave. Sabbatical leave entitlements for Members on voluntary reduced workload will be pro-rated in
accordance with the reduced workload.
7.35.4 Members who use this option shall remain Members of the Bargaining Unit, notwithstanding the definition of
Membership as defined in Article 2.15 –
Recognition of the Bargaining Unit.
7.35.5 For the application of tenure and promotion policies, periods of reduced workload shall be pro-rated in accordance
with the reduction in workload. Full-time research and teaching activities at another institution while a Member is on
voluntary reduced workload at
Laurentian will be counted for purposes of the minimum time requirement for promotion.
7.35.6 Members on voluntary reduced workload retain both the right and the obligation to contribute to the administrative
work of the University. Evaluations of such activity by the Dean/University Librarian would be expected to recognise the
reduced workload of the Member. As full-time Members of the Bargaining
Unit, Members on voluntary reduced workload retain the right to participate in academic councils as full voting Members
and to receive minutes and other
Departmental/School and University documents and communications if the Member can be present on campus. If
Members are absent from campus, the
University is not required to undertake extraordinary steps to assure the ability of the Member to fully participate.
7.35.7 During the period of voluntary reduced workload,
Members are expected to submit annual reports as per Article 5.45 – Annual Report for Members in order to qualify for
Progress-Through-The-Ranks increments (Article 8.15 – Progress-Through-The-
Ranks Increments and Article 8.20 – Procedures for the Award/Denial of a Progress-Through-The-Ranks
Increment). The evaluation will take into account the reduced workload. If awarded, the Progress-
Through-The-Ranks increment will be added to the
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 149

Collective Agreement 2008-11 base salary of the Member. The new base salary will be used to determine the actual
salary of the
Member in conformity with the percent reduction in workload.
ARTICLE 7.40 – LEAVES OF ABSENCE WITHOUT PAY
7.40.1 A Member may be granted a leave of absence without pay under terms approved by the University.
All such terms including arrangements for benefits shall be set out in written form prior to the leave. All terms shall be
communicated in written form to the
Union for information prior to the leave. Permission for such leave shall not be unreasonably denied by the Employer.
7.40.2 An application for such leave shall normally be submitted in writing to the Dean/University Librarian at least six (6)
months in advance stating the purpose of the leave. An application for an extension should be made in writing to the
Dean/University Librarian at least four (4) months in advance. These time requirements may be waived in special
circumstances.
7.40.3 Applications for such leaves shall be recommended by the Dean/University Librarian after consultation with the
Department/School. Final approval rests with the Vice-President, Academic.
7.40.4 Leave of absence without pay under this Article shall normally not exceed two (2) years.
7.40.5 The Members may elect to discontinue the benefits during the leave of absence subject to existing policies and
regulations. If they elect to continue those benefits available to the Members, they shall make suitable arrangements as
defined in clause
7.40.1 above.
7.40.6 Court and Political leaves shall be governed by
Article 7.45 – Court Leaves and Article 7.50 –
Political Leaves.
ARTICLE 7.45 – COURT LEAVES
7.45.1 Leave of absence with pay shall normally be granted to any Member, other than a Member on leave of absence
without pay, who is required to serve on a jury or to attend as a witness or an expert in a court of justice or before any
legal or statutory body in
Canada with power to compel the attendance of witnesses before it.
7.45.2 The Members shall notify their Dean/University
Librarian in advance, in writing, and shall provide proof of their attendance, if so requested.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 150

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Members shall attempt to make arrangements to ensure that their duties are properly carried out during the period of their
absence.
7.45.3 Leave with pay does not apply to Members serving a sentence or appearing as a witness on their own behalf.
7.45.4 When Members wish time off in order to pursue a civil action in court, the Members shall apply to the
Dean/University Librarian for leave of absence without pay. (See Article 7.40 – Leaves of Absences
Without Pay.)
7.45.5 If Members are required to absent themselves from their duties to appear in court as a result of legal action taken
against them in regard to matters arising out of the performance of their duties to the
University, they shall not be penalised for such absence. Such an absence shall be governed by clause 7.45.2 above.
ARTICLE 7.50 – POLITICAL LEAVES
7.50.1 The Employer recognises that all Members of the
Bargaining Unit are free to enter public life and to seek any political office, as a member of the provincial or federal
government, or any full-time political office.
7.50.2 If Members of the Bargaining Unit wish to allow their names to stand either before a party convention or for actual
nomination for an election, the Members shall notify the Dean/University Librarian concerned within a reasonable time so
that the Dean/University
Librarian may make whatever arrangements may be deemed necessary in order to ensure that the resulting added
workload can be properly performed by others from the date of the issuance of the writ up to and including the date of the
election.
7.50.3 The Employer may grant such a Member leave without pay for a period from the issuance of the writ up to and
including election day. Such leave shall not be unreasonably withheld.
7.50.4 Should the Members not be elected, they shall come back to work immediately to assume their normal duties.
7.50.5 If the Members are elected and:
(a) If they are Members with tenure and return immediately upon ceasing to hold office within six (6) years of their
election, all rights, privileges and rank shall be restored to them upon return and the Members shall be entitled to a rate of
pay including all statutory
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 151

Collective Agreement 2008-11 increases which were granted to Members of the teaching staff of equal rank that the
Members occupied at the time the leave was granted. Extensions of the six (6) year time limit may be made by agreement
of the
Parties. During the term of any such leave, the Members shall be entitled to leave without remuneration. Such Members
shall not be entitled to any rights or privileges under this
Collective Agreement except in regards to benefits as governed by Article 7.40 – Leaves of Absence Without Pay.
Nothing in this Article shall be construed as preventing such Members from being employed on a part-time basis by the
University for lecturing/professional library service or for any task, in which case the
Members shall be remunerated therefore at the normal scale for part-time Members of the teaching/professional library
staff.
(b) If they are a Member without tenure, they shall be deemed to have resigned their position with the University as of the
day following their election.
7.50.6 Any Members of the Bargaining Unit who wish to run for a political office other than a full-time one are free to do so
subject to Article 5.15 – Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of Academics. Any such
Members of the Bargaining Unit shall be required to perform all normal duties as set out in this Collective
Agreement.
ARTICLE 7.55 – PHYSICAL AND MENTAL ILLNESS
7.55.1 The Members of the Bargaining Unit are eligible for sick leave up to a maximum of six (6) months at salary
otherwise receivable from the date of disability due to accident or illness, for each separate disability cause, excluding
pregnancy which shall be covered by the provisions of Article
7.60 – Pregnancy, Parental and Adoption Leaves.
Illness of a duration of more than six (6) months will be dealt with according to the provisions of the
University's Long-Term Disability Plan, and the
Employer agrees that there shall be no amendments to that plan during the life of the
Collective Agreement which shall materially affect the nature or level of the benefits to which a
Member is entitled. As soon as practicable after the start of each disability period, the Dean/University
Librarian must be informed by or on behalf of the disabled about the absence and about its expected duration.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 152

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Where the Employer makes payment to the
Member according to the above mentioned terms or assumes liability therefore, the Employer is subrogated to all rights of
recovery of the Member to the extent that the Employer has made payment to, or on behalf of, or for the benefit of the
Member.
The Employer may bring an action in the name of the Member to enforce these rights.
7.55.2 (a) A Member shall, when requested by the
Dean/University Librarian, submit the certificate of a legally qualified medical practitioner certifying that the Member is
unable to attend to the duties of her/his position;
(i) For any sick leave in excess of five
(5) consecutive working days.
(ii) In the event a Member's sick leave pattern raises substantial doubt of the claim, even if the individual's sick leave
periods are short enough not to require medical certificates otherwise.
(b) In this Article, a “legally qualified medical practitioner” shall be limited to licensed physicians, licensed midwives,
licensed dentists and registered psychologists.
Please note that being under the care and treatment of a person other than a licensed physician, a Member may
jeopardize qualifying for Long-Term Disability. A physician is a person who is duly licensed to practice medicine and is
recognized by the
College of Physicians and Surgeons.
(c) The Member shall only be required to submit one medical certificate of disability or illness per absence, unless the
expected duration of the absence is extended beyond the prognosis provided in the original certificate.
In such circumstances the Member shall submit additional certificates of disability or illness for each extension.
(d) Any certificate of disability or illness submitted, in addition to certifying that the
Member is unable to attend to the duties of her/his position, shall indicate the probable duration of the Member’s absence
but the legally qualified medical practitioner shall not disclose any information respecting the
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 153

Collective Agreement 2008-11 diagnosis of the condition giving rise to the
Member’s absence, without the Member’s written and informed consent.
(e) Where the certificate is requested under subparagraph 7.55.2 (a) (ii) above, a copy of the request for the certificate
and a copy of the certificate of disability produced shall be provided to the Union by the Dean/University
Librarian.
(f) Upon receipt of any certificate of disability, the Dean/University Librarian shall advise the Member of the Member’s right
to accommodation if such accommodation will assist the Member to return to work to full or partial duties, or will assist the
Member to return to work at an earlier date than would otherwise be the case.
(g) If the Member requires or wishes accommodation, the Member shall submit to the Dean/University Librarian the
certificate of a legally qualified medical practitioner certifying the details of the accommodation that the Member requires
and the expected duration of the accommodation.
(h) A copy of the certificate provided pursuant to paragraph 7.55.2 (g) above shall be provided to the Union by the
Dean/University
Librarian.
(i) The Employer, the Union and the Member will cooperate fully to achieve the accommodation required by the Member,
and to ensure, where possible, that any changes to the Member’s workplace required by the accommodation are in place
for the Member’s return.
(j) The reasonable costs of any certificates required under this Article shall be paid by the Member and reimbursed by the
Employer to the Member.
7.55.3 In order to have a sick leave benefits period reinstated up to the maximum, Members of the
Bargaining Unit who have been absent and in receipt of sick leave benefits must return to work for at least one (1) full
working day in the case of a completely unrelated and different disability cause, and for thirty (30) calendar days in the
case of the same disability cause.
7.55.4 Sick leave benefits for any period of absence following notice of termination of employment will
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 154

Collective Agreement 2008-11 not be payable without substantiating medical evidence.
7.55.5 Sick leave benefits are not cumulative and are not cashable upon termination of employment or at any other time.
7.55.6 Sick leave benefits will be reduced by the amount of any Worker's Compensation benefits or similar disability
income benefits which the Member of the
Bargaining Unit is eligible to receive by reason of accident or sickness, from a government plan, except Unemployment
Insurance.
(a) A Member may be required by the Vice-
President, Academic to undergo a medical examination by a legally qualified medical practitioner appointed by the
University in the following circumstances:
(i) If the Member submits a request for accommodation pursuant to paragraph 7.55.2 (g) above;
(ii) At the time the Member indicates her/his readiness to return to work, if the absence has been for a period of a month
or more;
(iii) At one other time during the sick leave; and
(b) The Employer shall pay all costs of the medical practitioner and shall pay all reasonable expenses incurred by the
Member with respect to such medical examination.
(c) Where the Employer requires the Member to undergo a medical examination pursuant to paragraph 7.55.6 (a) above it
shall notify the
Member with a copy to the Union and it shall provide the Member with the names of three
(3) duly qualified medical practitioners and the Member shall select one of those practitioners to conduct the examination.
(d) The medical practitioner who conducts the examination shall provide a report to the
Member, which report shall certify whether or not the Member is medically able to perform the duties of her/his position, or
whether the Member could perform such duties with accommodation; a prognosis for the Member’s return to work; and,
where applicable, whether or not accommodation requested by the Member is appropriate.
The report shall not contain any diagnosis of the Member’s condition, unless the Member,
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 155

Collective Agreement 2008-11 in consultation with the Union, requests that the diagnosis be included.
(e) Within five (5) working days of the receipt of the report, the Member shall provide the report to the Dean/University
Librarian who shall in turn provide a copy to the Union within five (5) working days.
7.55.7 When invalidity is due to drug addiction or alcoholism, benefits provided by this Article will be granted only for
leaves of absence necessary for proper treatment under a physician's care or that of specialized personnel.
7.55.8 When the Member’s behaviour raises reasonable and substantial doubt as to the state of her/his physical or mental
health, which affects in a material way the Member’s ability to perform her/his duties, or which raises real concern for the
safety of the Member or other members of the University community, the Vice-President, Academic may require the
Member to undergo a medical examination in accordance with clause 7.55.6 above. The Union shall be notified when
such action is taken. Where the report is requested as a result of a real concern for the safety of the Member or other
members of the University community, the report produced, in addition to the information provided pursuant to paragraph
7.55.6 (d) above, shall certify whether or not the Member’s behaviour raises any real concern for the safety of the
Member or other members of the University community.
7.55.9 Sick leave benefits defined in this Article may not be granted under the following circumstances:
(a) Intentionally self-inflicted injuries or diseases.
(b) Pregnancy (however, complications due to pregnancy are covered by sick leave provisions, upon submission of a
medical certificate).
(c) While vacation pay is also being received.
(d) Wilful participation in riots, wars or violent or uncontrolled demonstrations or protests.
(e) Injuries or diseases sustained while committing a criminal act for which the
Member has been found to be guilty by a duly constituted court or while serving a prison sentence.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 156

Collective Agreement 2008-11
ARTICLE 7.60 – PREGNANCY, PARENTAL AND ADOPTION
LEAVES
7.60.1 Pregnancy Leave
(a) A pregnant full-time Member or pregnant
Permanent Sessional Member shall be entitled to seventeen (17) weeks pregnancy leave.
(b) During the period of pregnancy leave as specified in paragraph 7.60.1 (a) above, a
Member shall receive from the Employer:
(i) For the first two (2) weeks, one- hundred percent (100%) of her nominal salary;
(ii) For up to a maximum of fifteen (15) additional weeks, an amount equal to the difference between the
Employment Insurance (EI) benefits received by the Member and one- hundred percent (100%) of the
Member's nominal salary;
(iii) Further, in the event of any reduction by the Government of Canada to the
Member's EI benefit entitlement, an amount necessary to ensure that the
Member receives the top-up described in subparagraph 7.60.2 (b)
(ii) above.
(c) If the Member is disentitled or disqualified from receiving EI benefits or should EI cease to provide coverage for
pregnancy benefits or adjust the amount of benefits that were received, then the Employer shall maintain the Member at
one-hundred percent (100%) of her nominal earnings for the period of her leave.
7.60.2 Notice Required for Pregnancy Leave
(a) The Member shall give the Employer at least two (2) weeks written notice of the date the pregnancy leave is to begin.
The notice period may be altered by mutual agreement.
(b) The notice period in paragraph 7.60.2 (a) above shall not apply if the Member stops working because of complications
caused by her pregnancy or because of a birth, still birth or miscarriage.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 157

Collective Agreement 2008-11
7.60.3 Duration of Pregnancy Leave
(a) The pregnancy leave of a Member who is entitled to take parental leave shall end seventeen (17) weeks after the
pregnancy leave began. In the case where the newborn child is hospitalized, a Member may postpone or interrupt her
pregnancy leave by the number of weeks the newborn child is hospitalized but it must be taken within the fifty-two (52)
weeks from the date of the birth of the child.
(b) The pregnancy leave of a Member who is not entitled to take parental leave shall end on the later of either the day that
is seventeen (17) weeks after the pregnancy leave began or the day that is six (6) weeks after the birth, still birth or
miscarriage.
7.60.4 Leave for Parent Not Taking Pregnancy or
Parental Leave
On the occasion of the birth of a child or the adoption of a child coming into the care or custody of a parent for the first
time, the child's parent who is not taking the pregnancy or the parental leave shall be entitled to a leave with full salary
and benefits of up to five (5) working days, to be taken at the discretion of the Member within the fifty-two
(52) weeks from the date of the birth of the child or the adoption of a child coming into the care or custody of a parent for
the first time.
7.60.5 Parental Leave on the Occasion of the Birth of a
Child
(a) On the occasion of the birth of a child, a
Member who is a parent and who has opted to take parental leave under the Employment
Insurance Act and applicable legislation shall be entitled to a parental leave of up to thirty- five (35) weeks.
(b) During the period of parental leave as specified in paragraph 7.60.5 (a) above, a
Member shall receive from the Employer:
(i) For the first two (2) weeks, one- hundred percent (100%) of her/his nominal salary;
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 158

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(ii) For up to a maximum of seven (7) additional weeks, an amount equal to the difference between the EI benefits
received by the Member and one-hundred percent (100%) of the
Member's nominal salary;
(iii) Further, in the event of any adjustment by the Government of
Canada to the Member's EI benefit entitlement, the Employer shall pay to the Member the amount necessary to ensure
that the Member receives the top-up described in subparagraph
7.60.5 (b) (ii) above.
(c) If the Member is disentitled or disqualified from receiving EI benefits or should EI cease to provide coverage for
parental benefits or adjust the amount of benefits that were received, the Employer shall maintain the
Member at one-hundred percent (100%) of her/his nominal earnings for the period of her/his leave.
7.60.6 Parental Leave on the Occasion of the Adoption of a Child
(a) On the occasion of the adoption of a child coming into the care or custody of a parent for the first time, a Member who
is a parent shall be entitled to a parental leave of up to thirty-seven (37) weeks. The parental leave must be commenced
within the fifty-two (52) weeks from the date the child comes into care or custody of the parent for the first time.
(b) During the period of parental leave as specified in paragraph 7.60.6 (a) above, a
Member shall receive from the Employer:
(i) For the first two (2) weeks, one- hundred percent (100%) of her/his nominal salary;
(ii) For up to a maximum of seven (7) additional weeks, an amount equal to the difference between the EI benefits
received by the Member and one-hundred percent (100%) of the
Member's nominal salary.
(iii) Further, in the event of any adjustment by the Government of
Canada to the Member's EI benefit entitlement, the Employer shall pay to the Member the amount necessary to
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 159

Collective Agreement 2008-11 ensure that the Member receives the top-up described in subparagraph
7.60.6 (b) (ii) above.
(c) If the Member is disentitled or disqualified from receiving EI benefits or should EI cease to provide coverage for
parental benefits or adjust the amount of benefits that were received, the Employer shall maintain the
Member at one-hundred percent (100%) of her/his nominal earnings for the period of her leave.
7.60.7 Notice Required for Parental Leave
(a) A Member shall give written notice to the
Employer of her/his intention to take a parental leave at least two (2) weeks prior to the commencement of such leave.
The notice period may be altered by mutual agreement.
(b) The notice period in paragraph 7.60.7 (a) above shall not apply if the Member stops working because the child comes
into the custody, care and control of the parent sooner than expected.
7.60.8 Extended Parental Leave
An extended parental leave without pay, up to a maximum of one (1) year, shall be given to
Members who request it.
7.60.9 General Considerations
(a) During leaves under this Article, the Member shall continue to participate in the pension plan and the other benefit
plans set out in this Collective Agreement. The Member and the Employer shall each continue to pay their applicable
share of contributions and/or premiums, unless the Member elects not to do so in writing.
(b) Nothing in this Article shall prevent a
Member from claiming sick leave for absences from work due to illnesses.
(c) Upon return to work, a Member who has taken leaves under this Article shall resume her/his former position with
her/his full nominal salary and benefits as provided for under this Collective Agreement.
(d) The period of a Member's leave shall be included in the calculation of her/his length of service for seniority purposes.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 160

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(e) A Member on pregnancy, parental or adoption leave may elect to defer contractual decisions on reappointment or
tenure/permanence by an equivalent period of time. When a Member elects to defer such decisions, she/he shall provide
the
Dean/University Librarian, or equivalent, with written notice of her/his intention to do so.
(f) The Parties agree that the provisions of this
Article shall be no less than those in the
Employment Standards Act, 2000 and
Employment Insurance Act as may be further amended. Differences in the interpretation of this Article shall be resolved
based on consistency with the Acts.
(g) Nothing in this Article shall prevent a
Member claiming pregnancy, parental or adoption leave during a sabbatical leave.
Any unused portion of a sabbatical leave shall be taken at a time mutually acceptable to the Member and Dean/University
Librarian.
(h) If both parents are Members, they may share their paid periods of leave between them.
ARTICLE 7.65 – SPECIAL LEAVES
7.65.1 A full-time Member, who holds a tenured or probationary appointment within the University, shall be eligible for a
paid leave of absence for a period of up to two (2) weeks to fulfill responsibilities relating to the special needs of a member
of the
Employee's family. Special needs may include, but are not restricted to, resettlement of aged or disabled parents, serious
illness of parents, partner, or child, medical treatment of partner or child that cannot be provided in the Sudbury Region.
The teaching/professional and service responsibilities of
Members on this leave shall normally be assumed by their colleagues without additional expense to the University.
ARTICLE 7.70 – COMPASSIONATE LEAVE
7.70.1 In the event of death of a partner, son or daughter
(including step-son, step-daughter and child of partner), the Employee shall be granted a leave of absence of up to ten
(10) working days with pay.
7.70.2 In the event of the death of another member of an
Employee's family, the Employee shall be granted a leave of absence of up to five (5) working days with
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 161

Collective Agreement 2008-11 pay.
The term “another member of an Employee’s family” means brother and sister, step-brother and step-sister, mother and
father, mother-in-law and father-in-law, sister-in-law and brother-in-law, grandparent, guardian, grandchildren,
daughter-in- law and son-in-law.
7.70.3 For a longer period of absence, a Member may apply for leave without pay according to Article 7.40 –
Leave of Absence Without Pay.
7.70.4 In the event of the death of an Employee’s nephew, niece, grandparent-in-law, aunt or uncle, the
Member shall be granted a leave of absence of one
(1) working day without loss in pay.
7.70.5 If, during her/his vacation period, a Member is bereaved in circumstances under which she/he would have been
eligible for leave under this
Article, she/he shall be granted leave and her/his vacation pay credits shall be restored to the extent of any concurrent
leave granted.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 162

Collective Agreement 2008-11
SALARY AND BENEFITS
ARTICLE 8.10 – SALARY STRUCTURE
The Salary Structure for the Academic Year 2008-09
8.10.1 The salary of each Member shall be composed of the base salary of each Member as of June 30, 2008 as modified
by the following items:
(a) A scale increase of three and one quarter percent (3.25%) of the Member's regular salary.
(b) A Progress-Through-The-Ranks increment for the evaluation carried out for the year 2007-
08 as described in Article 8.20 – Procedures for the Award/Denial of a Progress-Through-
The-Ranks Increment. The Progress-
Through-The-Ranks increments shall have a value of two thousand six hundred dollars
($2,600).
For all ranks other than Full
Professor/Librarian, where a Member’s salary exceeds $126,584 per annum, the
PTR will be at fifty percent (50%) value. For all ranks, where a Member’s salary exceeds
$140,110 per annum, the PTR will be nil.
(c) Additional qualification increments shall be awarded pursuant to Article 8.30 – Additional
Qualifications Increments.
(d) Merit increments shall be awarded according to Article 8.25 – Merit Increments, regardless of breakpoints.
(e) On January 1, 2009, a progressive catch-up based on the following formula: ($100,000 /
Member’s salary) X five hundred and fifty dollars ($550)
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 163

Collective Agreement 2008-11
8.10.2 The salary floors for 2008-09 shall be as follows:
Rank Floor
Lecturer / General Librarian $52,277
Assistant Professor / $63,317
Librarian
Associate Professor / $76,268
Librarian
Full Professor / Librarian $93,966
The Salary Structure for the Academic Year 2009-10
8.10.3 The salary of each Member shall be composed of the base salary of each Member as of June 30, 2009 as modified
by the following items:
(a) A scale increase of three and one quarter percent (3.25%) of the Member's regular salary.
(b) A Progress-Through-The-Ranks increment for the evaluation carried out for the year 2008-
09 as described in Article 8.20 – Procedures for the Award/Denial of a Progress-Through-
The-Ranks Increment. The Progress-
Through-The-Ranks increments shall have a value of two thousand seven hundred dollars
($2,700).
For all ranks other than Full
Professor/Librarian, where a Member’s salary exceeds $130,698 per annum, the
PTR will be at fifty percent (50%) value. For all ranks, where a Member’s salary exceeds
$144,664 per annum, the PTR will be nil.
(c) Additional qualification increments shall be awarded pursuant to Article 8.30 – Additional
Qualifications Increments.
(d) Promotion or Merit increments shall be awarded according to Article 8.15 – Progress-
Through-The-Ranks Increments and Article
8.25 – Merit Increments, regardless of breakpoints.
(e) On January 1, 2010, a progressive catch-up based on the following formula: ($100,000 /
Member’s salary) X nine hundred and twenty-five dollars ($925)
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 164

Collective Agreement 2008-11
8.10.4 The salary floors for 2009-10 shall be as follows:
Rank Floor
Lecturer / General Librarian $54,526
Assistant Professor / $65,930
Librarian
Associate Professor / $79,252
Librarian
Full Professor / Librarian $97,527
The Salary Structure for the Academic Year 2010-11
8.10.5 The salary of each Member shall be composed of the base salary of each Member as of June 30, 2010 as modified
by the following items:
(a) A scale increase of three and one quarter percent (3.25%) of the Member's regular salary.
(b) A Progress-Through-The-Ranks increment for the evaluation carried out for the year
2009-10 as described in Article 8.20 –
Procedures for the Award/Denial of a
Progress-Through-The-Ranks Increment. The
Progress-Through-The-Ranks increments shall have a value of two thousand eight hundred dollars ($2,800).
For all ranks other than Full
Professor/Librarian, where a Member’s salary exceeds $134,946 per annum, the
PTR will be at fifty percent (50%) value. For all ranks, where a Member’s salary exceeds
$149,365 per annum, the PTR will be nil.
(c) Additional qualification increments shall be awarded pursuant to Article 8.30 – Additional
Qualifications Increments.
(d) Promotion or Merit increments shall be awarded according to Articles 8.15 –
Progress-Through-The-Ranks Increments and Article 8.25 – Merit Increments, regardless of breakpoints.
(e) On January 1, 2011, a progressive catch-up based on the following formula: ($100,000 /
Member’s salary) X one thousand dollars
($1000)
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 165

Collective Agreement 2008-11
8.10.6 The salary floors for 2010-11 shall be as follows:
Rank Floor
Lecturer / General Librarian $57,298
Assistant Professor / $69,073
Librarian
Associate Professor / $82,827
Librarian
Full Professor / Librarian $101,697
ARTICLE 8.15 – PROGRESS-THROUGH-THE-RANKS
INCREMENTS
8.15.1 The purpose of these increments is to provide, through a series of salary increases, orderly promotion within rank.
8.15.2 These increments shall be awarded annually for satisfactory performance of duties per Article 8.20 –
Procedures for the Award/Denial of a Progress-
Through-The-Ranks Increment.
8.15.3 Increments may be withheld if performance is deficient, as outlined in Article 8.20 – Procedures for the
Award/Denial of a Progress-Through-The-Ranks
Increment.
8.15.4 Any Members who are promoted to a higher rank shall not be required to take a loss in salary. If such
Members' salaries are below the floor salary of the higher rank, they shall receive the floor salary upon promotion.
8.15.5 Promotion Increment: Effective July 1, 2009, there shall be an award equal to one (1) PTR increment added to the
Member’s base salary upon promotion from either Lecturer/General Librarian to Assistant
Professor/Librarian, from Assistant
Professor/Librarian to Associate
Professor/Librarian, from Associate
Professor/Librarian to Full Professor/Librarian. In no circumstances will a Member be awarded more than two (2) PTRs in
any given year, excepting the case of a reinstatement of the PTR increment as per Article 8.20 – Procedures for the
Award/Denial of a Progress-Through-The-Ranks Increment.
ARTICLE 8.20 – PROCEDURES FOR THE AWARD/DENIAL
OF A PROGRESS-THROUGH-THE-RANKS INCREMENT
8.20.1 When a Member's performance is judged to be satisfactory by the Dean/University Librarian, the annual increment
shall be awarded.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 166

Collective Agreement 2008-11
8.20.2 Decisions to award the annual increment or notification of a review as per clause 8.20.4 below shall be
communicated to the Members by June 30, provided that the Member submitted her/his annual report by May 15. If the
annual report is submitted after May 15, the decision of the Dean/University
Librarian shall be communicated to the Member within six (6) weeks after the Member’s annual report has been
submitted.
8.20.3 For those Members on sabbatical or study leave, the decision whether to award the annual increment may be
delayed until submission of their final report as specified in Article 5.45 – Annual Report for
Members.
8.20.4 The Dean/University Librarian shall examine the annual reports as per Article 5.45 – Annual Report for
Members, and make such other inquiries, as she/he deems appropriate. Where the Dean/University
Librarian has concerns about the Member’s performance with respect to the awarding of the PTR increment, the
Dean/University Librarian shall first issue a written warning, stating the basis of the concerns, and what needs to be done
to remedy them. The Member shall be awarded the PTR increment for that year and shall indicate in the following year’s
annual report what measures the
Member has taken to address those concerns. If in the following year, the Dean/University Librarian is not satisfied that
the concerns have been addressed by the Member and that the Member does not show active participation and/or
satisfactory performance in all three (3) areas, A), B), and C) (within the provisions of Article 5.15 – Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of Academics) or in the subset of those areas for which the Member’s terms of employment
are relevant, the Dean/University Librarian shall communicate to the Member the possibility that the
PTR will be denied. The Dean/University Librarian shall specify the reasons and provide the evidence giving rise to this
possibility. The Dean/University
Librarian shall invite the Member to a meeting in order to address the concerns. The Dean/University
Librarian shall inform the Union of the upcoming meeting and shall inform the Member of her/his right to be accompanied
by a Union representative. The review shall include a consideration of at least the three (3) previous annual reports, if
available, and a meeting with the Member. The Dean/University
Librarian shall invite the Member to submit relevant materials.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 167

Collective Agreement 2008-11
8.20.5 When a review is undertaken under the terms of clause 8.20.4 above, the deadline for communicating the decision
to the Member is delayed by one (1) month from those stated in clause 8.20.2 above.
8.20.6 After making her/his evaluation, the Dean/University
Librarian shall inform the Member in writing whether the increment is awarded and shall provide a justification for the
decision.
8.20.7 A Member whose annual increment is denied shall have the right of appeal to the Vice-President,
Academic. In making her/his decision, the Vice-
President, Academic shall at a minimum consult the annual report, the investigation made by the
Dean/University Librarian, and the appeal presented by the Member, and may consult more broadly. In cases where a
Member elects to appeal, the decision of the Vice-President,
Academic shall be communicated to the Member within six (6) weeks of the Member’s appeal.
8.20.8 If the Vice-President, Academic reverses the decision of the Dean/University Librarian and awards the annual
increment, a retroactive payment shall be made to the Member as appropriate.
8.20.9 There shall be no denial of a PTR increment to a full-time Member with a probationary appointment prior to the
Member's tenure decision as per Article
5.60 – Tenure Evaluation Procedures.
8.20.10 A Member shall have the opportunity for reinstatement of the increment, as follows: A reinstatement of the
increment shall occur July 1 for the academic year after the Member receives two
(2) consecutive satisfactory annual assessments from the Dean/University Librarian, or after the
Member receives a promotion in rank as per Article
5.65 – Promotion Procedures, or after the Member receives a merit award as per Article 8.25 – Merit
Increments. The reinstated amount shall be equal to the amount of the PTR denied.
8.20.11 If, within three (3) years of the first denial of a PTR, the Member’s performance is not satisfactory the
Dean/University Librarian may deny the PTR, as per clause 8.20.4 above without a preliminary year of warning.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 168

Collective Agreement 2008-11
ARTICLE 8.25 – MERIT INCREMENTS
8.25.1 Merit increments are awarded by the Vice-President,
Academic and shall become a permanent part of the
Member's salary structure. Only Full
Professors/Librarians and Permanent Sessional
Lecturers are eligible for merit increments.
8.25.2 It shall be the goal of the Vice-President, Academic to award merit increments to at least five percent (5%) of the
Full Professors/Librarians and Permanent
Sessional Lecturers at Laurentian University.
Notwithstanding this goal, the criteria specified in clause 8.25.5 below shall not be violated.
8.25.3 All merit increments have the value of one Progress-
Through-The-Ranks increment.
8.25.4 Merit increments are awarded according to the procedures of Article 5.50 – Assessment of a
Member’s Performance. Only tenured members are eligible to vote.
8.25.5 For Full Professors/Librarians, the FPC/FFPC/LPC shall consider the award of merit increments in relation to
criteria for promotion to the rank for Full
Professor/Librarian. The Member’s performance at
Laurentian University over a three (3) year time period or since the award of the last merit increment, whichever is shorter,
must be judged clearly above the level for promotion to Full Professor/Librarian, as stated in Article 5.10 – Academic
Qualifications
Guidelines.
For Permanent Sessional Lecturers, the judging of the applicant’s performance over the past three (3) years, or since the
award of the last merit increase, shall be based on consistently good teaching.
8.25.6 In making recommendations in merit increment cases, the procedure in Article 5.50 – Assessment of a Member’s
Performance shall be followed.
8.25.7 All merit increments received previously or awarded during the academic year 2007-08 under the terms of prior
Collective Agreements remain in force.
8.25.8 The determination of individuals to receive merit increments pursuant to clause 8.25.5 above shall not be subject to
grievance.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 169

Collective Agreement 2008-11
8.25.9 Although Lecturer, Assistant and Associate
Professors are not eligible for merit increments, as per clause 8.15.5 of Article 8.15 – Progress-Through-
The-Ranks Increments, Members in these ranks shall receive an additional PTR when promoted to the next rank.
ARTICLE 8.30 – ADDITIONAL QUALIFICATIONS
INCREMENTS
8.30.1 An additional increment, equal to the value of a
Progress-Through-The-Ranks increment, shall be awarded to individuals obtaining a first Doctorate provided that such a
degree was not a condition of nomination to a specific rank and salary as indicated in the letter of appointment. Such an
award will be retroactive to the first (1st) day of July immediately preceding the receipt of the Doctorate. The Doctorate will
be deemed to have been received when the individual can provide a diploma or a letter from the university where the
Doctorate is being obtained indicating that all the conditions for the Doctorate, including the thesis defence and the
corrections to the thesis, have been met. The Member shall apply for an additional increment through the
Dean/University Librarian and must furnish a copy of the appropriate document.
ARTICLE 8.35 – OVERLOADS
8.35.1 All ranks of full-time Members who are teaching a course on a paid overload basis will receive a stipend as shown
below for courses beginning after these dates:
Full course Half course
(6 credits) (3 credits)
July 1, 2008 $8,596 $4,298
July 1, 2009 $8,811 $4,406
July 1, 2010 $9,028 $4,514
8.35.2 Where scheduled Continuing Education courses may otherwise have to be cancelled, Members may, if they
choose, agree to teach a course for an amount less than the overload stipend. The Union shall be informed of any such
agreement prior to its settlement.
8.35.3 In recognition of agreement by the Parties, that excessive overload teaching/professional Library service is
undesirable (specified in paragraph
5.40.6 (b) of Article 5.40 – Academic Workload), the
Dean/University Librarian has the authority to limit the number of overload courses a Member may teach in any given
academic year, or its equivalent in the Library. In order to fulfil this function, the
Dean/University Librarian must approve all paid
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 170

Collective Agreement 2008-11 overloads including distance education courses and on-campus courses administered by
the Centre for
Continuing Education. In decisions to limit the number of paid overloads, the Dean/University
Librarian shall be guided by her/his assessment of the total workload of the Member, the impact of overload
teaching/professional library work on the likely career progress of the Member, including the capacity of the Member to
undertake scholarly activity and administrative duties expected of all
Members. A decision by the Dean/University
Librarian to limit paid overloads in any academic year shall not be grievable.
8.35.4 Librarians may be paid full or half overloads according to the schedule outlined in this Article.
8.35.5 All Members who believe they are entitled to an overload stipend shall apply per Article 5.40 –
Academic Workload.
8.35.6 Full-time Members in the Department of Music teaching Applied Music courses on overload shall be paid the base
rate of $55.00 per hour, plus an increase by two and a half percent (2.5%) in 2008-
09, two and a half percent (2.5%) in 2009-10 and two and a half percent (2.5%) in 2010-11.
Total hourly rate of pay
July 1, 2008 $56.38
July 1, 2009 $57.78
July 1, 2010 $59.23
ARTICLE 8.40 – DISTANCE EDUCATION COURSES
8.40.1 Normal function
The development and/or supervision of distance or on-line education courses are an integral part of
University functions. Therefore, the development and/or supervision of a distance or on-line education course may be part
of a Member's normal workload as per Article 5.40 – Academic Workload and according to Senate regulations or may be
carried out on an overload basis. Prior to assigning the supervision of a distance or on-line course to a
Member as part of her/his normal workload, the
Dean shall seek volunteers willing to teach such a course. The Dean shall not assign the development of a distance or
on-line education course to a
Member as part of her/his normal workload without her/his prior consent in writing. The development
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 171

Collective Agreement 2008-11 and/or supervision of a distance or on-line education course are governed by the terms
and conditions of a contract issued by the Centre for Continuing
Education on behalf of the University.
8.40.2 Equivalents
The development of a distance education course shall normally be equivalent to twice the credit value of the course but
may be equivalent to a lesser amount or up to a maximum of a full workload.
In all instances, a written statement of the equivalency will be provided in advance by the Dean when the work is part of
assigned workload and by the Director of Continuing Education otherwise.
8.40.3 Copyright
Copyright for distance education courses shall be governed by Article 6.35 – Copyright.
8.40.4 Compensation
Where the development of a distance education course is not included as a part of a Member's normal workload the
payment shall be an overload payment based on the equivalence outlined in clause
8.40.2 above. A Member may also agree to some combination of normal workload assignment plus paid overload as
appropriate.
8.40.5 Supervision
Where the supervision of a distance education course is not included as part of a normal workload, a six (6) credit course
shall be paid for on the basis of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500) for one (1) to five (5) students. For each
additional student more than five (5) students, the additional pay per student shall be two hundred and fifteen dollars
($215) for the year 2008-09, two hundred and twenty dollars ($220) for the year 2009-10, and two hundred and thirty
dollars ($230) for the year
2010-11. The maximum pay for a six (6) credit course shall be the rate of pay of a Sessional
Member without establishment for a six (6) credit course as per Article 4.55 – Rates of Pay for
Sessional Members with restrictions as per clause
5.40.6 of Article 5.40 – Academic Workload. Three
(3) credit courses shall be pro-rated
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 172

Collective Agreement 2008-11
ARTICLE 8.45 – BENEFITS
8.45.1 The following benefits are available to full-time
Members and Permanent Sessional Members:
(a) Retirement Plan of Laurentian University of
Sudbury and its Federated and Affiliated
Colleges
(b) Group Life Insurance
(c) Accidental Death and Dismemberment
(d) Dependent Group Life
(e) Extended Health Care (including semi-private hospital coverage)
(f) Long-Term Disability
(g) Dental Care
8.45.2 Participation in the Retirement Plan of Laurentian
University of Sudbury and Its Federated and
Affiliated Colleges shall be mandatory for all new full-time faculty Members effective the date of their appointment.
8.45.3 The cost of premiums shall be shared by the
Employer and the Member on the following basis:
Employer Member
Life Insurance 50% 50%
Coverage up to maximum of
$400,000
Accidental 50% 50%
Death & Coverage up to
Dismember- maximum of ment $400,000
Dependent 50% 50%
Group Life
Extended 100%
Health Care
Dental Care 100%
Long Term 100%
Disability Coverage amount up to maximum of
$5,300 per month
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 173

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Retirement (a) 7% of the part (a) 5% of the part
Plan of the of the
Member’s Member’s
Pensionable Pensionable
Earnings that Earnings that is below the is below the year’s basic year’s basic exemption as exemption as prescribed by
defined by the the Canada Canada
Pension Plan; Pension Plan;
(b) 5.2% of the (b) 3.2% of the part of the part of the
Member’s Member’s
Pensionable Pensionable
Earnings that Earnings that is between the is between year’s basic the year’s exemption and basic the year’s exemption
maximum and the year’s pensionable maximum earnings; pensionable earnings;
(c) 7% of the part (c) 5% of the part of the of the
Member’s Member’s
Pensionable Pensionable
Earnings that Earnings that is in excess of is in excess of the year’s the year’s maximum maximum pensionable
pensionable earnings. earnings.
(d) 1.5% of the part of the
Member’s
Pensionable
Earnings to the Minimum
Guarantee
Fund in accordance with the
Retirement
Plan of
Laurentian
University of
Sudbury and its Federated and Affiliated
Colleges.
8.45.4 Extended Health Care
Effective November 1, 2008, extended health care will be enhanced by providing full payment to paramedical practitioners
(audiologist, chiropractor, kinesiologist, massage therapist, naturopath, osteopath, podiatrist, and speech therapist) up to
an annual limit of two thousand two hundred dollars
($2,200) per benefit year per covered individual.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 174

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Effective November 1, 2008, the professional services for a certified psychologists only will increase up to four thousand
dollars ($4,000) per covered individual per benefit year.
Extended health care will continue to provide payment, according to the Extended Health Care
Plan, to physiotherapists and athletic therapists without an annual limit.
8.45.5 Vision Care
Effective November 1, 2008, purchase and fitting of prescription glasses or elective contact lenses, as well as repairs or
elective laser vision correction procedures, up to an overall maximum of three hundred and fifty dollars ($350) per covered
individual in any twenty-four (24) consecutive months.
8.45.6 Hearing Aids
Effective November 1, 2008, up to five hundred dollars ($500) per covered individual in any two (2) consecutive benefit
years.
8.45.7 Dental
The Employer shall pay one hundred percent
(100%) of the cost of the premiums of the dental plan in accordance with the current rate schedule as established by the
Ontario Dental Association and including six (6) month recall, effective
November 1, 2008.
Annual Reimbursement
Maximum
Basic coverage, $3,000 including major services, per person per benefit year:
Basic coverage 100%
Reimbursement by plan
Major services 80%
Reimbursement by plan
Orthodontics Lifetime 50% coverage per Maximum Reimbursement person $3,000 by plan
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 175

Collective Agreement 2008-11
8.45.8 Any Member on an unpaid leave of absence shall make special arrangements for benefit coverage as outlined in
Article 7.40 – Leaves of Absence Without
Pay.
8.45.9 Benefits for the spouse and dependants of a
Member, enrolled in the various benefits plans at the time of death, shall continue for a period of two
(2) years from the date of death and shall terminate at the end of the month in which the death occurred, two (2) years
after the date of death.
8.45.10 Retirees Health Benefits Plan (RHBP) (effective
July 1, 2008)
(a) Member contribution increased to fifteen dollars and sixty four cents ($15.64) per month.
(b) Maximum benefit for single retirees increased to eight hundred dollars ($800) per year.
(c) Maximum benefit for family of retirees increased to one thousand three hundred dollars ($1,300) per year.
ARTICLE 8.50 – TUITION FEE EXEMPTION AND SPOUSAL
LIBRARY CARD
Tuition Fee Exemption
8.50.1 The following shall be eligible for Tuition Fee
Exemption.
(a) All full-time Members as of the effective date of appointment and all retired full-time
Members.
(b) Spouses and dependants of all full-time
Members, of retired full-time Members, of deceased retired Members and of Members who died while in the full-time
employ of the
University. Dependants include wife and husband (including common-law relationships), children up to the age of
twenty-six (26) years (including natural, step, and adopted children, wards and other children for whom the Member is the
primary caregiver).
8.50.2 Exemption from tuition fees is subject to the following conditions:
(a) A student must remain in good standing as defined by the Registrar's Office in order to qualify for tuition exemption. In
the event of loss of good standing, the same course(s) or
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 176

Collective Agreement 2008-11 an equivalent one(s) may be taken at the student's expense in order to reinstate good
standing and eligibility.
(b) Students who are eligible for an exemption from tuition fees are not exempted from the payment of incidental fees.
(c) To the extent that a grant is specifically given to defray tuition a student who receives a grant is not eligible for
exemption from tuition fees.
(d) To the extent that tuition is reduced by a
Laurentian University tuition scholarship, the student is not eligible for exemption from tuition fees. Where the funds are
from an outside source this condition does not apply.
8.50.3 Eligibility ceases with the term immediately following the date of termination of employment of a Member, unless
otherwise specified in this Collective
Agreement.
8.50.4 The Employer reserves the right to modify or rescind this policy depending on the development of future
government policy that has a bearing on this matter.
Spousal Photo ID Library Card
8.50.5 On an annual basis, spouses of all Members, including retired Members, deceased retired
Members and Members who died while in the employ of the University, upon request, will be supplied with a photo
identification library card at no cost to them except if they require a replacement for a lost card. The charge for
replacement will be fifteen dollars ($15) per card.
ARTICLE 8.55 – MOVING EXPENSES
8.55.1 On initial appointment to the University each regular full-time Member shall be entitled to reimbursement for moving
expenses subject to the following conditions:
(a) All claims must be substantiated by official receipts or reasonable facsimiles.
(b) The University shall reimburse claims at the rate of one hundred percent (100%) to a maximum of five thousand
dollars ($5,000).
In exceptional circumstances, the University
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 177

Collective Agreement 2008-11 may exceed this amount. Such conditions will be specified in the initial letter of
appointment.
8.55.2 Moving expenses include:
(a) Moving, packing, crating and unpacking of household goods and personal effects.
(b) Transfer of family by the most economical means of transportation.
(c) Reasonable living expenses for the duration of the trip to the new location.
(d) One (1) advance visit for the purpose of securing suitable housing. The newly appointed Members may be
accompanied by their spouse in this instance.
8.55.3 Employees appointed on a contract of twelve (12) month’s duration or less shall not normally be eligible to claim
moving expenses. The Vice-President,
Academic may under special circumstances allow some amount of moving expenses to be reimbursed for such
employees.
8.55.4 Moving expenses paid to a new Member will constitute a loan made by the University. This loan will be retired
when the Member has completed three
(3) years of continuous service to the University, each year being equivalent to one third (1/3) of the reimbursement of the
loan.
8.55.5 Should the beneficiary of such a loan leave the
University before completing three (3) years of continuous service, for personal or disciplinary reasons, she/he must
reimburse the University for the remaining unretired portion of the loan.
ARTICLE 8.60 – PHYSICAL EDUCATION FACILITIES
8.60.1 As of the effective date of appointment, all full-time
Members, their spouses and dependants as defined in Article 8.50 – Tuition Fee Exemption and Spousal
Library Card shall be eligible for free Physical
Education Centre membership subject to the payment of an annual service fee and lockerette rental fee as established by
the Division of Physical
Education.
ARTICLE 8.65 – PUBLIC LIABILITY INSURANCE
8.65.1 Subject to the express provisions of the current policy (ies) of insurance providing such coverage, the University
shall continue to maintain the present public liability insurance insuring, among others,
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 178

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Members who are acting within the scope of their employment against liability claims (including negligence, property
damage, personal injury, libel and slander), up to a limit of four million dollars
($4,000,000). Any legal representation to which
Members are entitled under this policy shall be provided in a fair and equitable manner. The Union is entitled to receive a
copy of the insurance policy upon request. Any changes in this current policy shall be made with the agreement of the
Parties.
ARTICLE 8.70 – PARKING
8.70.1 The Parties agree that Members wishing to reserve a parking space in any parking area on campus shall pay the
fee established by the University. The parking fees shall be determined following consultation with the Advisory
Committee on Security
Services on which the Union shall maintain its current representation of one (1) Member.
8.70.2 Members with a temporary or Long-Term Disability or pregnant Members shall be entitled upon request to their
Dean/University Librarian to a reserved parking space close to their office.
ARTICLE 8.75 – REIMBURSEMENT OF EXPENSES
8.75.1 All Members will be reimbursed within the normal amounts payable following approval of the
Miscellaneous Expense Claim Form for reasonable out-of-pocket expenses incurred while on authorized business for the
University, such as parking fees, transportation costs, meal allowances, equipment for field trips, accommodation costs,
and incidental expenses. Receipts for such expenses will be provided where required. The claim for reimbursement
including receipts where required shall be submitted to the Member’s Chair/Director.
In the event that the Chair/Director is unwilling or unable to reimburse such expenses, the receipts for such expenses
shall be submitted to the appropriate Dean/University Librarian. Amounts reimbursed will be according to the schedule of
amounts in the Employer’s ‘Policies and Procedures
Concerning Travel and Related Expenses’ as updated annually and amended to include incidental expenses.
ARTICLE 8.80 – POLICY AND PROCEDURES IN THE
EVENT OF DEATH
NOTE: The following procedures and practices are currently in place and are largely determined by external agencies. It
may from time to time be
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 179

Collective Agreement 2008-11 necessary to make adjustments to these procedures based on requirements of these
external agencies.
The Parties agree that such changes required by external agencies do not require prior approval.
8.80.1 The beneficiary is to contact the Pension and
Benefits Officer in the Personnel Office. If within seven (7) days the University has not been contacted by the beneficiary,
the University shall make every reasonable effort to contact the beneficiary.
8.80.2 Life Insurance
(a) The Employee is insured for three (3) times salary to a maximum of four-hundred thousand dollars ($400,000).
(b) The following documents will be required to request payment of the insurance carrier:
(i) The beneficiary must complete a
Statement required by the insurance carrier as well as provide her/his
Social Insurance Number;
(ii) The notice of the Employee's death that appeared in the Obituary
Notices;
(iii) A Death Certificate;
(iv) The last insurance certificate that was issued to the faculty Member.
(c) The Life Insurance proceeds are usually paid within one (1) month.
8.80.3 Pension Plan
If the Member dies prior to receiving a pension, the following will be required to process the benefits:
(a) The University shall contact the Beneficiary and outline the procedures to be followed.
(b) The Beneficiary must complete an
"Application for Death Benefit".
(c) Provide a Death Certificate.
(d) Provide a "notarial copy" of the Employee's
"Last Will and Testament".
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 180

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(e) All Members should have a current "Last Will and Testament".
(f) Beneficiaries of Members without a "Last
Will and Testament" will have to settle any disputes between potential Beneficiaries
(children vs spouse) in the courts, prior to receiving any funds from the Pension Plan.
The file will be forwarded to the Actuary for the calculation of the death benefit. Once that calculation is received, the
Beneficiary will be contacted. The Beneficiary can request a lump sum refund or a transfer to a R.R.S.P. that is not
subject to locked-in provisions.
The death benefit from the Pension Plan is usually paid within two (2) to three (3) months.
If the Member dies after commencing to receive her/his pension, the form of pension that was selected by the Member will
determine if further benefits are payable to the Beneficiary.
8.80.4 Benefits to Spouse and Dependants shall continue as per clause 8.45.9 of Article 8.45 – Benefits.
8.80.5 Every Member while employed by Laurentian
University will be expected to complete by January 1,
2009 or within six (6) months of hire a statement to be retained in their Personnel File indicating who shall have access to
the Member’s computer files and office contents in the event of the Member’s death or incapacitation. In the event of the
death or incapacitation of the Member, the Employer shall review the Member’s files and office contents to retrieve the
documents and files belonging to the
Employer. This review shall be consistent with Article
6.30 – Patents and Article 6.35 – Copyright. After this review, only the person or persons named shall have access to the
Member’s computer files and office contents. If there is no signed access statement, the right of access shall go to the
executor in the event of death, and to the next of kin in the event of incapacitation. The executor or next of kin shall have
access to the deceased member’s files for a period of at least one (1) year. The ownership of the computer files and office
contents belonging to the Member shall be transferred according to the
Member’s will.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 181

Collective Agreement 2008-11
ARTICLE 8.85 – SALARY TO BENEFICIARY IN THE EVENT
OF DEATH OF FACULTY MEMBER
8.85.1 Salary Rate: shall be the rate of gross pay for the contract period, including any proportionate reduction in stipend
consequent on approved
University policies.
8.85.2 Termination Date: shall be the end of the month in which the death occurs.
8.85.3 Period of Negotiations: where it would unduly retard settlement to postpone closure until the completion of a
Collective Agreement, an arbitrary figure in excess of any anticipated agreement may be used as the basis for settlement
by mutual agreement of the Parties.
8.85.4 Vacation Pay: the lesser of two percent (2%) per week or eight percent (8%) per month of entitlement shall be
calculated on gross earnings paid during the period of the year to termination.
8.85.5 Sabbatical Leave: is an investment by the University in an approved plan of professional development with a view
to enhance future contributions to the work of the University and the broader scholarly community.
Sabbatical leave entitlement is not a benefit, which the Employee or her/his assigns can claim as of right in the event of
either termination (for any cause), retirement, or death. For purposes of death benefits
(Hospital care, Extended Medical and Dental
Insurance), any sabbatical stipend is to be regarded as the equivalent of salary.
8.85.6 Contractual Travel Allowance: may be claimed by the
Beneficiary for vouchered expenses incurred prior to termination.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 182

Collective Agreement 2008-11
CHAIRS AND DIRECTORS
ARTICLE 9.10 – DUTIES OF CHAIRS/DIRECTORS
9.10.1 The Chairs/Directors are responsible for providing academic leadership to their Departments/Schools.
They serve as the representatives of their
Departments/Schools in administrative matters, as well as the official spokesperson of their
Departments/Schools and they report to the
Dean/University Librarian.
9.10.2 Their duties are the following and shall be carried out in accordance with good administrative practices:
(a) To ensure, to the degree possible, that the
Members of the Department/School are informed of their duties and responsibilities in accordance with Senate
regulations, the regulations of the University and this
Collective Agreement.
(b) To convene and preside over meetings of the Department/School at regular intervals during the academic year and to
be an ex officio and voting Member of its standing committees.
(c) To ensure as far as reasonably possible that the Members of the Department/School have an opportunity to share in
the decision- making process, in the formulation of policies, and in the administrative tasks of the Department/School.
(d) To review and act on all matters involving staff, both faculty and other, with the appropriate internal body and in
accordance with Article 5.45 – Annual Report for
Members and in accordance with the terms of Collective Agreements applying to other
University bargaining units.
(e) To be responsible for presenting the academic programs of the
Department/School for accreditation or approval of external bodies, as needed.
(f) To prepare budgetary recommendations and administer the annual budget for the
Department/School in conjunction with the
Dean/University Librarian and the appropriate internal body.
(g) To advise the Dean/University Librarian on the teaching roster and time-table/desk time
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 183

Collective Agreement 2008-11 for the Department/School following consultation with Members of the
Department/School and other appropriate
University bodies and officers including the
Office of the Registrar and the Centre for
Continuing Education and to supervise the implementation of the timetable and roster/desk time.
(h) To supervise student counselling on academic matters and the assignment of programs of study within the
Department/School.
(i) To prepare a succinct annual report, for submission to the Dean/University Librarian due by June 30, on the enrolment,
curriculum and other programmatic issues facing the Department/School. The annual report shall also include a list of
Sessional
Lecturers with establishment in specific courses. In preparing the annual report, the
Chair/Director shall use a standardized form developed by the Dean/University Librarian for each Faculty and the Library
and approved by the Faculty Council. The
Department/School reports shall be submitted to the Dean/University Librarian after they have been distributed to
Members of the Department/School.
(j) To supervise the use and proper maintenance of space and equipment allocated to the Department/School.
(k) To maintain relations between the
Department/School and external professional constituencies and agencies and the wider community, as relevant and
appropriate: and to arrange representation as necessary.
(l) To ensure, to the degree possible, that the
Members of the Department/School receive a copy of the summary workload recommendations and the Dean’s/University
Librarian’s workload decision according to clause 5.40.1 of Article 5.40 – Academic
Workload, and that each Member also receive a copy of the sabbatical plans according to clause 7.25.3 of Article 7.25 –
Sabbatical Leaves.
(m) To perform such other duties in connection with the work and administration of the
Department/School as the appropriate
Dean/University Librarian may assign her/him, and as are consistent with her/his status as a Member of the Bargaining
Unit.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 184

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(n) The Chair/Director shall not be required to sign-off or approve the annual reports of
Members of the Department/School. Neither shall the Chair/Director be required to review or approve Member
applications for reimbursement for Professional
Development Expenditures (Article 6.45 –
Professional Development Expenditures and
Article 4.70 – Professional Development
Expenditures for Sessional Members). The
Professional Development Expenditures shall be submitted directly to the secretary for the Department/School who shall
in turn submit the reimbursement forms to the
Dean/University Librarian.
ARTICLE 9.15 – SELECTION OF CHAIRS/DIRECTORS
9.15.1 The Chair/Director of a Department/School shall be appointed by the Vice-President, Academic in accordance with
the procedures of this Article. The
Chair/Director shall not serve for more than two (2) consecutive terms.
9.15.2 The following procedures will be initiated by the
Dean/University Librarian at least six (6) months before the end of a term of a Chair/Director or immediately if a post of
Chair/Director becomes vacant.
9.15.3 (a) The Dean/University Librarian shall ensure that there is a selection committee with the following composition,
including a Chair of the committee, in place within five (5) months before the end of a term of a
Chair/Director or immediately if a post of
Chair/Director becomes vacant:
(i) One third (1/3) of the full-time teaching/librarian Members of the
Department/School to the nearest whole number. The members of the committee shall be tenured or probationary
appointments, if possible, and shall be elected by all the full-time teaching/librarian
Members of the Department/School.
(ii) The Dean/University Librarian as a non-voting member.
(iii) The Chair/Director of another
Department/School appointed by the
Dean/University Librarian in consultation with the
Department/School seeking a
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 185

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Chair/Director.
(iv) At least one (1) member of the committee shall be a woman. Where the Department/School has no women members
and no woman is otherwise on the committee, the
Dean/University Librarian, in consultation with the
Department/School shall appoint a woman member in addition to those described above.
(b) The Committee shall elect a Chair from among its members.
9.15.4 The Chair of the Selection Committee shall use all reasonable efforts to invite all full-time Members of the
Department/School (including those on leave) to submit to her/him, within a specified period of time, in confidence, the
names of possible candidates and reasons supporting their candidature. Without disclosing the names of the individuals
submitting them, these names and reasons shall be communicated to the Selection Committee.
9.15.5 In the event that no candidates are submitted by the
Department/School within ten (10) working days of the Selection Committee's request, the Committee may suggest a
short list of its own or make a request to the Vice-President, Academic to search for a candidate from outside the
Department/School or the University. In the latter instance, the
Department/School shall be consulted for the names of possible outside candidates.
9.15.6 (a) The Selection Committee, after undertaking any further inquiries that it deems appropriate and relevant shall
establish a short list of not fewer than two (2) and not more than three (3) candidates, unless it is convinced that it can find
only one suitable candidate.
(b) The selection committee shall evaluate candidates on the grounds of proven administrative ability, scholarly activity,
and teaching/librarian competence. The
Selection Committee will be guided by
Article 9.10 – Duties of Chairs/Directors in making this evaluation. The Committee may wish to meet with the candidates.
(c) Prior to the compilation of its final short list, the Selection Committee will obtain, in writing, the consent of the
candidates on that list.
(d) The Department/School may wish to meet with the short-listed candidates prior to the
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 186

Collective Agreement 2008-11 balloting process.
9.15.7 Within ten (10) working days from the final receipt of names from the Department/School as per clause
9.15.4 above, the Chair of the Selection Committee shall make all reasonable efforts to provide all full-time Members of
the Department/School, including those on leave, with a ballot. The ballot shall set out the short list of candidates. The
Members shall indicate their one (1) preferred choice, in confidence, to the Chair of the Selection
Committee within fifteen (15) working days from the distribution date noted on the ballot. The ballots shall be opened and
counted in the presence of the
Selection Committee.
9.15.8 In the event the Selection Committee finds only one
(1) suitable candidate, the Chair of the Selection
Committee shall use all reasonable efforts to submit to all the full-time Members of the
Department/School, including those on leave, a ballot showing this candidate's name. Time limits for this submission and
the Member's responses shall be as set out in clause 9.15.7 above. The ballots shall be opened and counted in the
presence of the Selection Committee.
9.15.9 The Chair of the Selection Committee shall report the results of the selection process and its recommendation to
the Dean/University Librarian.
9.15.10 If the Dean/University Librarian is prepared to accept the Selection Committee's recommendation then the
Dean/University Librarian will forward this recommendation together with her/his own to the
Vice-President, Academic who will make the appointment.
9.15.11 Should the Dean/University Librarian not be prepared to accept the Selection Committee's recommendation, the
Dean/University Librarian shall indicate her/his reservations to the Selection
Committee and the Department/School. If the
Dean/University Librarian and the Selection
Committee are unable to agree on an appointment, the selection procedure shall be reinstituted as in clause 9.15.3
above.
9.15.12 The Chair/Director shall be a tenured or probationary Member of faculty. Any outside appointment shall be made
in accordance with
Article 5.20 – Appointment and Renewal.
9.15.13 In exceptional circumstances the Vice-President,
Academic and the Dean/University Librarian, after
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 187

Collective Agreement 2008-11 consultation with a Department/School, may appoint an acting Chair/Director for a period
of up to four (4) months, consistent with Article 9.20 – Term of Office of Chairs/Directors and Article 9.30 –
Removal from Office of Chairs/Directors.
9.15.14 Abbreviated Selection Process
In many selection processes, it is apparent at step 4
(clause 9.15.4 above) that a strong consensus has emerged for the selection of one (1) candidate. In that event, the
Selection Committee may proceed directly to step 8 (clause 9.15.8 above) of the procedure. If at least two (2) Members
object to the abbreviated selection process, then the Committee shall follow the full procedure.
ARTICLE 9.20 – TERM OF OFFICE OF CHAIRS/DIRECTORS
9.20.1 The term of office for Chairs/Directors shall normally be for three (3) years, renewable by
Department/School selection per Article 9.15 –
Selection of Chairs/Directors.
9.20.2 Should Chairs/Directors not be able to carry out their duties for four (4) months or less, the
Chairs/Directors shall make provision for the take- over of their duties in consultation with the
Department/School and Dean/University Librarian.
9.20.3 If the absence is for a period of longer than four (4) months, the Chairs/Directors shall relinquish her/his title and a
new Chair/Director shall be selected according to the procedures set out in Article 9.15 –
Selection of Chairs/Directors.
ARTICLE 9.25 – TEACHING LOAD REDUCTIONS AND
STIPENDS FOR CHAIRS/DIRECTORS
9.25.1 (a) The Chair/Director shall be entitled to a six
(6) credit teaching load reduction during each calendar year served as Chair/Director.
For Departments/Schools with twenty-five
(25) or more full-time Members and employees (as defined in clause 9.25.2 below), Chairs/Directors shall receive an
additional three (3) credit course reduction.
Where the Dean has assigned a full teaching load with the agreement of the Member, an overload payment (or proportion
thereof) will be made in lieu thereof. Where the
University Librarian has assigned a greater than normal workload with the agreement of the Member, an overload
payment (or proportion thereof) will be made.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 188

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(b) The Chair/Director may voluntarily waive these entitlements, in full or in part.
9.25.2 The Chair/Director will be entitled to an annual stipend for each full year served. Portions of a year will be
pro-rated. An acting Chair/Director shall receive a pro-rated stipend in lieu of the
Chair/Director for each full month served in excess of the first month. The stipend shall be based on the number of
full-time teaching/librarian Members in the Department/School and the number of other full-time equivalent employees
(secretaries, technical staff, etc.) who report to the
Chair/Director. For purposes of administration of this Article, the Chair/Director shall indicate to the
Dean/University Librarian as of September 1 of each year the category under which she/he should be compensated.
Changes occurring after
September 1 shall be reflected in the following year.
If the Dean/University Librarian agrees with the category under which a Chair/Director is to be compensated, the
Dean/University Librarian will forward this information to the Vice-President,
Academic. If the Dean/University Librarian does not agree with the category and the disagreement cannot be resolved,
the Vice-President, Academic will rule on the matter. The ruling of the Vice-
President, Academic shall not be grievable.
9.25.3 Full-time teaching/librarian Members and other full- time employees (compensation per year):
One to nine $2,250
(1 – 9)
Ten to nineteen $3,250
(10 – 19)
Twenty to twenty-nine $4,250
(20 – 29)
Thirty and over $5,250
(30 – )
9.25.4 In lieu of compensation, the Chair/Director may elect to receive the whole or part of the stipend in the form of an
equivalent enhancement to the professional allowance. The Chair/Director will indicate her/his intentions in this matter by
September 1 of each year.
9.25.5 In addition to the above compensation, the
Chair/Director shall be entitled to a credit of one (1) year toward her/his sabbatical for a completed three
(3) year term.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 189

Collective Agreement 2008-11
ARTICLE 9.30 – REMOVAL FROM OFFICE OF
CHAIRS/DIRECTORS
9.30.1 Proceedings for the removal of the Chair/Director may be initiated by:
(a) A written complaint to the Dean/University
Librarian specifying the reasons for the complaint, signed by at least a majority of the full-time faculty of the
Department/School, excluding those on leave and the
Chair/Director herself/himself. The
Dean/University Librarian shall investigate the situation and offer her/his services to resolve the matter. If the attempt is
unsuccessful, the
Dean/University Librarian will forward the written complaint together with her/his report to the Vice-President, Academic.
or
(b) A written complaint by the Dean/University
Librarian to the Vice-President, Academic specifying the grounds for the complaint. The grounds for such complaints
should normally be related to Articles 9.10 – Duties of
Chairs/Directors and Article 5.15 – Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of Academics.
9.30.2 The Vice-President, Academic shall invite the
Chair/Director and the Department/School to discuss the complaint. Following an adequate investigation, the
Vice-President, Academic may request the
Chair/Director to relinquish their office. If the
Chair/Director are not requested to relinquish their office the Department/School or the Dean/University
Librarian may request initiation of procedures under paragraph 9.30.3 (c) below.
9.30.3 If the Chair/Director does not voluntarily resign as
Chair/Director:
(a) The Vice-President, Academic is empowered to suspend that individual as Chair/Director.
Once suspended, the Member retains all other rights and responsibilities as defined in this Collective Agreement.
(b) The Vice-President, Academic shall instruct the Dean/University Librarian to appoint an
Acting-Chair/Director in consultation with the
Department/School in accordance with Article
9.15 – Selection of Chairs/Directors and shall forward the complaint to the President in the form of an appeal.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 190

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(c) The President shall create an ad hoc committee to investigate the complaint and shall conduct its investigation in
accordance with statutory requirements. As a result of the committee's investigation, the President shall rule on the
question of removal from office.
(d) The decision of the President shall be final, non-grievable and binding on all parties.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 191

Collective Agreement 2008-11
REDUNDANCY AND FINANCIAL EXIGENCY
ARTICLE 10.10 – REDUNDANCY
10.10.1 For the purposes of this Article, the declaration of a state of redundancy by the Employer shall mean that the
number of Members employed in a particular
Department/School(s) must be reduced. The
Employer agrees that no procedures other than those specified in this Article will be used to deal with redundancies as
defined in clause 10.10.3 below. It is understood that the term redundancy does not apply to limited term appointments
that carry no implication of renewal or continuation beyond the stated term in accordance with Article 5.20 –
Appointment and Renewal.
10.10.2 The Employer shall declare a state of redundancy by sending a written notice to the Union and to the
Vice-President, Academic that it has approved a resolution for one of the reasons outlined in clause
10.10.3 below. With this notice, the Employer shall submit a detailed report specifying the reasons why the redundancy is
justified and the exact magnitude of the reduction believed to be necessary.
10.10.3 A declaration of redundancy by the Employer may be initiated in one of two (2) ways:
(a) Senate may resolve to terminate a Faculty,
Department/School or program for reasons other than Financial Exigency. For the purpose of this Article, a program is
defined as a course of study previously approved by the Senate and leading to a degree or a diploma. Should the
program involve more than one Faculty or Department/School, the plural should be understood in the following clauses. If
the Employer resolves to approve
Senate's decision, then a program redundancy shall be declared.
(b) The Vice-President, Academic may make a submission to the Employer that a particular
Department(s)/School(s) has (have) a larger number of Members than necessary to fulfil its (their) program and service
teaching requirements in the light of student demand.
Such a redundancy shall be known as a workload redundancy. The Employer agrees that it will not declare a workload
redundancy if such an action will result in insufficient academic personnel for that
Department(s)/School(s) to continue to offer a
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 192

Collective Agreement 2008-11 viable program(s). The onus shall be on the
Employer to show that the proposed reductions are consistent with normal workloads as defined in Article 5.40 –
Academic Workload and that the proposed reductions will not create an inequitable workload for the
Department(s)/School(s) affected by the redundancies.
10.10.4 Redundancies may be justified only for bona fide academic reasons and/or on the grounds of insufficient student
demand. When insufficient student demand is used as a justification, such lack of demand must be demonstrable over a
period of at least three (3) years and projections into the future must not indicate any appreciable increase in this student
demand.
10.10.5 As a result of the Employer's declaration, a
Redundancy Committee shall be formed. This
Committee shall hold its first meeting within fifteen
(15) days of receipt by the Union of the Employer's notice as specified in clause 10.10.2 hereof. Within ten (10) days of
receipt of that notice, the Union shall forward to the Vice-President, Academic the names of three (3) Members who shall
serve on the
Redundancy Committee.
10.10.6 The Redundancy Committee shall include the following:
(a) Three (3) Members chosen by the Union
(b) Three (3) individuals named by the Employer
(c) The Vice-President, Academic as non-voting
Chair
10.10.7 Within sixty (60) days of its first meeting, the
Redundancy Committee shall make its final report to the Employer (with a copy to the Union). The
Employer shall make no new academic or administrative appointments nor shall the Employer order the reduction or
redistribution of the actual number of full-time Members of the Bargaining Unit, until the Redundancy Committee has
made its final report or until the time limit of sixty (60) days stated in this clause has expired, whichever comes first.
10.10.8 It shall be the responsibility of the Redundancy
Committee in consultation with the Vice-President,
Academic, the Dean/University Librarian and the
Faculty/Library Personnel Committee to recommend who, among the Members of the
Department(s)/School(s) under consideration, shall be affected by redundancy.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 193

Collective Agreement 2008-11
10.10.9 Keeping in mind that the continuing academic function assigned to the Department/School is of the highest
priority, the Redundancy Committee shall consider the following steps in the following order:
(a) Non-renewal of limited term appointments within the Department/School.
(b) Non-renewal of two (2) year probationary contracts within the Department/School.
(c) Non-renewal of contracts of Members within the Department/School on three (3) year probationary contracts.
(d) Removal of a tenured Member from the
Department/School.
10.10.10 If the Redundancy Committee decides that Members with tenure or on a three (3) year probationary contract will
be affected by Redundancy pursuant to clause 10.10.9 hereof, it shall include, in its final recommendation to the
Employer, a list of administrative and academic areas to which the
Members could be transferred, with or without a year's retraining, considering their academic and professional
qualifications.
10.10.11 If the Employer approves a resolution to act on the
Redundancy Committee's recommendation that a
Member be declared redundant, then the Employer shall send the Member a written notice of its resolution. This notice
shall also contain an offer to the tenured Member of the following options:
(a) Voluntary early retirement if the Member is age fifty-five (55) or more.
(b) Transfer in whole or in part to another
Department/School for which the Member is academically qualified or could become qualified with a year's retraining if the
transfer can be effected by one (1) of the following means:
(i) Filling a vacancy
(ii) Non-renewal of a limited term contract
(iii) Non-renewal of a two (2) year probationary contract
(iv) Non-renewal of contract of Members on three (3) year probationary contract in the Department/School to which the
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 194

Collective Agreement 2008-11 tenured Member is to be transferred.
(c) Transfer to an appropriate administrative vacancy in the University.
(d) Termination of employment with severance pay.
(e) Any other alternative that may be implemented in the future with the mutual consent of the two Parties.
Any of the above options shall be implemented in accordance with the terms of this Article. All proposed transfers to
another Department/School must have the approval of the Vice-President,
Academic. If the offer is to transfer one (1) component of the Member's workload (this component restricted to either
teaching or research) to another academic area, such offer shall include a statement of the duties of that Member and a
method of weighing the Member's evaluation for merit based on these special arrangements.
If the Employer cannot offer at least one (1) of paragraphs 10.10.11 (b) or (c) above, it shall offer to keep the Members in
their present position until such time as it can offer them one (1) of paragraphs
10.10.11 (b) or (c) above unless clause 10.10.16 below applies.
10.10.12 Notwithstanding Article 5.20 – Appointment and
Renewal, Members with a two (2) year, initial probationary appointment can be refused the second probationary
appointment for reasons of redundancy in accordance with clauses 10.10.9 or 10.10.11 above. In such instances, the
Members shall receive notice by December 15 of the academic year in which their contract comes up for renewal. A
written notice of non-renewal shall be sent to the Members in which redundancy shall be clearly stated as the reason for
non-renewal.
10.10.13 Notwithstanding Article 5.20 – Appointment and
Renewal and Article 5.60 – Tenure Evaluation
Procedures, Members who are on a three (3) year probationary appointment can be refused a renewal of their
appointment and/or tenure for reasons of redundancy in accordance with clauses 10.10.9 or
10.10.11 above. In such instances, the Members shall receive notice by December 15 of the academic year in which their
contract comes up for renewal. A written notice shall be sent to the Members in which redundancy shall be clearly stated
as the reason for non-renewal and/or refusal to grant tenure. They shall be given severance pay in accordance with
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 195

Collective Agreement 2008-11 clause 10.10.18 hereof as well as recall rights in accordance with clause 10.10.18 below.
10.10.14 Tenured Members who accept a transfer to another academic area in whole or in part, shall retain their rank as
well as all pre-existing employment rights. If such a transfer requires retraining, the Members shall be granted leave to a
maximum of one (1) year at one hundred percent (100%) salary plus benefits.
Any tuition fees connected with the retraining shall be paid by the University.
10.10.15 Tenured Members who accept a transfer to an administrative position in accordance with paragraph
10.10.11 (c) hereof cease to be Members of the
Bargaining Unit on the date that the transfer becomes effective. Members transferred to an administrative position shall
not be dismissed for a period of five (5) years for reasons other than just cause and shall retain for this period the full
rights of
Members of this Union, to grieve dismissal for cause. Such Members shall not have their pay decreased as a result of the
transfer but they shall receive only the basic percentage increase to salary scale and no increments until the normal
salary level for their administrative position has reached their own. For a period of five (5) years from the date of their
appointment to the administrative position, the
Members shall have first right of refusal of any academic vacancy within Laurentian for which they are judged by the
Vice-President, Academic to be academically competent.
10.10.16 Where a redundancy results from the termination of a program as per paragraph 10.10.3 (a) above and when all
transfer provisions have been exhausted, the Employer may lay-off a tenured Member provided that those Members who
are at least forty-five (45) years of age, have tenure and in respect of whom the sum of years of seniority from the
effective date of tenure plus age equals fifty-five (55) shall be exempt from lay-off.
Costs associated with any arbitration arising out of lay-off shall be distributed in accordance with Article
11.15 – Arbitration Procedure. The usual burden of proof shall apply.
10.10.17 Groups and/or individuals who are selected for redundancy may grieve their selection (under Article
11.10 – Grievance Procedure) on the grounds of bias or procedural error, as well as on the grounds that the criteria for
selection have been applied in a
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 196

Collective Agreement 2008-11 manner which is discriminatory or is in bad faith.
This right to grieve includes the right to challenge the validity of the redundancy but not the right to challenge the
Employer's authority to initiate
Redundancy procedures.
Tenured Members who wish to remain in the employ of the University and who have been offered transfer but do not wish
to accept the offer must grieve this transfer within thirty (30) days of receipt of the offer.
If the Arbitration Board concludes that the Members' refusal is well founded, the Members retain their original positions. If
the Arbitration Board concludes that the Members' refusal are not well founded or that another suitable transfer is
available, then the
Members must accept the transfer within thirty (30) days of receiving a copy of the decision or else the
Members' employment shall be terminated. The effective date of notice shall be the date that the arbitrator's report is
received by the Members. The
Members shall retain recall and notice of termination rights but shall lose their rights to all severance payments and
benefits.
10.10.18 All Members who are on tenured or three (3) year probationary appointments, and whose appointments are
terminated pursuant to this Article shall have rights as set out hereafter:
(a) (i) Twelve (12) months' notice in writing or any equivalent combination of notice plus salary followed by
(ii) Six (6) months' salary plus one (1) month's salary for each year as a full-time employee provided that no
Member on a three (3) year probationary appointment receives less than nine (9) months' salary and no tenured Member
receives less than eighteen (18) months' salary.
All payments under this clause shall be based on the Members' total regular salary including the University's contribution
to pension and other benefit plans for their final full academic year of service at the University. In no case shall the
number of months' salary paid under this clause exceed the time remaining until the normal retirement age of the
Member.
(b) First right of refusal of all academic vacancies within Laurentian University, for which they have academic competence
as judged by the
Vice-President, Academic in consultation with the Department/School to which the individual
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 197

Collective Agreement 2008-11 is to be appointed for a period of three (3) years for a Member on a three (3) year
probationary appointment and five (5) years for a tenured Member from the effective date of termination. Individuals who
accept such positions shall return to the University at the rank they held when their appointments were terminated, with
full recognition for years of service at Laurentian. Disputes arising out of these recall procedures are referable to the
grievance and arbitration process set out in this Collective Agreement.
Individuals who are recalled pursuant to this
Article shall have up to thirty (30) days to accept such recall offer, and shall terminate their alternative employment and
take up the offered post, as soon as they are contractually able to do so but in no instance later than six
(6) months after accepting the recall offer.
(c) Reasonable efforts by the Employer to assist a laid-off Member in obtaining suitable alternative employment including
the use of professional assistance as well as access to
University resources.
(d) Reasonable access to library, laboratory and computer facilities subject to the agreement of the Dean/University
Librarian concerned until suitable alternative employment is secured or for three (3) years in the case of a Member on a
three (3) year probationary appointment or for five (5) years in the case of a tenured
Member if suitable alternative employment has not been secured.
(e) Eligibility for themselves and their dependants for exemption from tuition and Physical
Education fees until suitable alternative employment is secured or for three (3) years in the case of a Member on a three
(3) year probationary appointment or for five (5) years in the case of a tenured Member if suitable alternative employment
has not been secured.
10.10.19 Nothing in this Article shall limit the total amount of severance benefits that a tenured Member might privately
negotiate with the Employer.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 198

Collective Agreement 2008-11
10.10.20 All grievances submitted under the terms of this
Article shall go directly to arbitration in accordance with Article 11.15 – Arbitration Procedure. Unless stated otherwise in
this Article, within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the written notice containing the decision which the Members wish to
grieve, the Members must give notice in writing to the Employer of their intention to submit that decision to Arbitration.
ARTICLE 10.15 – FINANCIAL EXIGENCY
10.15.1 The Board of Governors and the Union agree that the first duty of the University is to ensure that its academic
priorities remain paramount, particularly with regard to the quality of instruction, library service and research, and the
preservation of academic freedom.
10.15.2 For the purposes of this Article, Financial Exigency shall be defined as substantial and recurring deficits, which
threaten the long-term solvency of the
University as a whole.
10.15.3 Reductions in academic staff for reasons of financial exigency shall occur only in extraordinary circumstances,
and only then after efforts to alleviate the financial crisis by economies in all other segments of the budget have been
undertaken and after all reasonable means of improving the
University's revenues have been exhausted.
10.15.4 Members may be laid off in accordance with this
Article only in the event that a state of financial exigency has been both declared and confirmed pursuant to the
procedures contained in this Article.
10.15.5 In the event that the Employer considers that a financial exigency exists, within the meaning of clause 10.15.2
above, it may give notice of such a belief. As of the date of such notice the procedures specified in this Article shall apply,
and no new appointments may be made to either the academic or administrative staff complement.
10.15.6 Within two (2) days of giving notice of its belief that a financial exigency exists, the Board of Governors shall
forward to the Union all financial documentation relevant to the alleged state of financial exigency.
10.15.7 Within fifteen (15) days of the notice specified in clause 10.15.5 above, the Parties shall establish a
Financial Commission which will consider the alleged financial exigency and either (a) confirm it (under whatever
conditions it chooses to impose) or (b)
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 199

Collective Agreement 2008-11 reject it.
10.15.8 The Financial Commission shall be chosen as is an
Arbitration Board per Article 11.15 – Arbitration
Procedure. It is agreed that in this instance no
Member of the Financial Commission shall be a government official, and the Minister of Labour, if requested to appoint a
Chair, shall choose a person who is not in the employ of a government. Decisions of the Financial Commission under this
Article shall be final and binding on all Parties. In this regard the
Financial Commission shall be deemed to be an
Arbitration Board.
10.15.9 The onus of proof shall be on the Employer to establish to the satisfaction of the Financial
Commission that a state of financial exigency exists within the meaning of this Article.
10.15.10 Within seven (7) days of the choice of a Chair, the
Financial Commission shall meet and invite and consider submissions on the University's financial condition. Inter alia it
shall consider:
(a) Whether the University's financial position (as evidenced from the total budget and not just the academic or salary
components thereof) constitutes a bona fide budgetary crisis such that deficits projected by generally accepted accounting
principles are expected to continue for more than two (2) fiscal years;
(b) Whether in view of the primacy of academic goals at the University the reduction of academic staff is a reasonable
type of cost saving;
(c) Whether all reasonable means of achieving cost-saving in other areas of the University budget have been explored
and exhausted;
(d) Whether all reasonable means of improving the University's revenue position have been explored and exhausted;
(e) Whether every effort has been made to secure further assistance from the provincial government;
(f) Whether enrolment projections are consistent with a proposed reduction in the academic staff complement;
(g) Whether all means of reducing the academic staff complement including voluntary early
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 200

Collective Agreement 2008-11 retirement, voluntary resignation, voluntary reduced workload, voluntary redeployment and
leaves, etc. have been exhausted, and
(h) Whatever other matters it considers relevant.
10.15.11 The Financial Commission will normally be expected to hand down its Report and deliver a copy to the
Employer and to the Union within sixty (60) days of its first meeting. If the Commission finds that a state of financial
exigency does not exist, no reductions of academic staff for reasons of financial exigency may take place. If the
Commission finds that a financial exigency does exist, its Report shall specify the amount of reduction required, if any, in
the budgetary allocation to salary and benefits for Members of the
Bargaining Unit. Any reduction in the budgetary allocation for academic salaries and benefits may be made conditional
upon the further exploration of alternative cost-saving measures by the University, and the Commission shall remain
seized of its jurisdiction in this matter pending the satisfactory exhaustion of all such specified alternatives. Within five (5)
days of receipt of the Report of the Financial
Commission, the Parties shall meet and confer with respect to its implications.
10.15.12 Pursuant to the ruling of the Financial Commission, the Board of Governors may reduce the budgetary allocation
for salaries and benefits of Members of the
Bargaining Unit but such reduction shall not exceed the amount of the reduction specified by the
Commission. The decision of the Board of
Governors shall be taken and written notice thereof sent to the Financial Commission within two (2) weeks of receipt of
the notice mentioned in clause
10.15.11 above.
10.15.13 Within twenty (20) days the Financial Commission shall apportion among the Faculties, Library and similar units,
the reduction in the budgetary allocation for salaries and benefits of the Members of the
Bargaining Unit. Whenever possible, such reductions will be divided in a proportionate amount among the Faculties and
Library within the University unless there is a clear and substantial reason for doing otherwise.
10.15.14 Within thirty (30) days, the Faculties/Library through their respective Faculty/Library Councils shall apportion the
budgetary reduction among the
Departments/Schools within the Faculty/Library and determine which among its Members are to be laid off. Whenever
possible such reductions will be divided among the units within a Faculty/Library in a
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 201

Collective Agreement 2008-11 proportionate amount unless there is a clear and substantial reason for doing otherwise.
10.15.15 The principal criteria in the termination/lay-off of
Members within a Department, School or similar unit shall be:
(a) The possession of qualifications suitable for the continuing function of the Faculty, School,
Department or Library.
(b) Quality of performance in teaching and research or scholarly activity where applicable.
(c) The possession of qualifications suitable for transfer with or without retraining to another academic or administrative
position within the
University.
(d) Contributions to the wider community.
10.15.16 Within a Department/School, a tenured Member shall not be terminated in preference to a non-tenured
Member. For tenured Members, the more senior
Member, in terms of service determined from the date at which tenure at the University became effective shall be retained
unless, after applying the above criteria, there is a clear and substantial reason for doing otherwise.
10.15.17 Those Members who are at least forty (40) years of age, have tenure and in respect of whom the sum of years
of seniority from the effective date of tenure plus age equals at least fifty-five (55) shall be exempt from lay-off until all
other academic staff within the
Faculty/Library and not included in this category have been laid off.
10.15.18 Should the Faculty/Library Council fail to determine within thirty (30) days who among its Members is to be laid
off, it shall be the responsibility of the
Deans/University Librarian to apportion the budgetary reduction within their Faculty/Library.
Should the Deans/University Librarian fail to make such a decision within seven (7) days, the Financial
Commission shall make the apportionment of the budgetary reduction.
10.15.19 Members who are selected for lay-off under this
Article shall be provided with written notice of the
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 202

Collective Agreement 2008-11 reasons for their selection. Lay-offs under this Article shall not be treated or recorded as
dismissals for cause.
10.15.20 After the selection of the Members who are to be laid off, but prior to the implementation of such lay-offs, the
Employer shall make every reasonable effort to secure positions elsewhere in the University, including administrative
positions, for those Members who are to be laid-off. Members who accept alternative academic employment retain all
pre-existing employment rights, including credit for sabbaticals, salaries and pensions. Members who accept alternative
employment shall be given the opportunity to retrain for a period of up to one (1) year for their new duties. The Employer
shall pay any related tuition fees and full salary to the Member during this retraining period.
10.15.21 Groups and/or individuals who are selected for lay-off by a Faculty/Library Council or Dean/University
Librarian, may grieve their selection under Article
11.10 – Grievance Procedure and Article 11.15 –
Arbitration Procedure on the ground of bias or procedural error, as well as on the grounds that the criteria for lay-off have
been applied in a manner that is discriminatory or is in bad faith. The right to grieve does not include the right to challenge
the validity of the financial exigency.
10.15.22 All tenured and probationary Members whose appointments are terminated pursuant to this Article shall have
rights as set out hereafter:
(a) (i) The University shall be obliged to offer twelve (12) months’ notice or twelve
(12) months' salary in lieu of notice followed by;
(ii) One (1) month's salary for each year as a full-time employee provided that no tenured Member shall receive less than
twelve (12) month's salary.
All payments under this clause shall be based on the Members' total salary including the
University's contribution to pension and other benefit plans for their final full academic year of service at the University. In
no case shall the number of months' salary paid under this clause exceed the time remaining until the normal retirement
age of the Member.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 203

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(b) First right of refusal of all academic vacancies within Laurentian University, for which they have academic competence
as judged by the
Vice-President, Academic in consultation with the Department/School to which the individual is to be appointed for a
period of three (3) years from the effective date of termination.
Individuals who accept such positions shall return to the University at the rank they held when they were laid off, with full
recognition for years of service at Laurentian. Disputes arising out of these recall procedures are referable to the
Grievance and Arbitration process set out in this Collective Agreement.
Individuals who are recalled pursuant to this
Article shall have up to thirty (30) days to accept such recall offer, and shall terminate their alternative employment and
take up the offered post, as soon as they are contractually able to do so but in no instance later than six
(6) months after accepting the recall offer.
(c) Reasonable efforts by the Employer to assist a laid-off Member in obtaining alternative employment including the use
of professional assistance as well as access to University resources.
(d) Reasonable access to Library, laboratory and computer facilities subject to the agreement of the Dean/University
Librarian concerned until suitable alternative employment is secured or for three (3) years whichever is less.
(e) Eligibility for themselves and their dependants for exemption from tuition and Physical
Education fees until suitable alternative employment is secured or for three (3) years, whichever is less.
10.15.23 Notice of academic vacancies shall be deemed to be good and sufficient if they are sent by the Board of
Governors to the Member's last known address with a copy to the Union. Any Member who fails to reply within thirty (30)
days or who refuses a permanent position offered under this Article shall lose all rights of recall.
10.15.24 A Member accepting a permanent position at
Laurentian University will no longer receive severance pay.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 204

Collective Agreement 2008-11
10.15.25 Any vacancy that occurs and that cannot be filled through the recall procedures in this Article will be filled in
accordance with the normal hiring practices.
10.15.26 Tenured Members, whose appointments are terminated while they are on leave as in Article 3.2, shall have the
same rights as other tenured Members in accordance with the terms of this Article.
10.15.27 Laid off Members who are recalled shall repay any portion of the allowance specified in clause 10.15.22 above
which exceeds their entitlement had they continued to occupy their normal position.
10.15.28 The cost of the Financial Commission established under this Article shall be borne by the Employer.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 205

Collective Agreement 2008-11
GRIEVANCE AND ARBITRATION
ARTICLE 11.10 – GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
11.10.1 There shall be no discrimination, harassment or coercion, of any kind, practised against any persons involved in
these procedures.
11.10.2 The Union and the Employer agree to make every reasonable effort to settle all grievances in a prompt, just and
equitable manner.
11.10.3 Definitions
(a) Grievance: A "grievance" shall mean any difference arising from the interpretation, application, administration or
alleged violation of the Collective Agreement, including any question as to whether a matter is arbitrable in accordance
with the Labour Relations Act,
1995.
(b) Grievor: The grievor is either the Union which initiates a grievance against the Employer on behalf of a Member or
group of Members or itself, or the Employer which initiates a grievance against the Union, an individual
Member or a group of Members except as otherwise prohibited in this Collective
Agreement.
(c) Individual Grievance: An individual grievance is a grievance initiated by the Union on behalf of an individual Member.
(d) Group Grievance: A group grievance is a grievance initiated by the Union on behalf of a group of Members.
(e) Policy Grievance: A policy grievance is a grievance by a Union which may involve a matter of general policy or of
general application of the Collective Agreement.
(f) Union Grievance: A union grievance is a grievance which directly affects the Union.
(g) Employer Grievance: An employer grievance is a grievance initiated by the Employer.
(h) "Working days": Working days shall mean
Monday through Friday, excluding
Recognised and other Holidays identified in
Article 7.10 – Recognized and Other Holidays including the customary December – January recess, as well as the months
of July and
August.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 206

Collective Agreement 2008-11
11.10.4 The time limits specified in this Article may be extended by mutual agreement by the Parties.
Moreover, an arbitrator shall have the power to waive time limits. The amended time limits must be specified in writing.
11.10.5 Notwithstanding clause 11.10.2 above, a grievor shall have recourse to the grievance procedures set out below if
such grievor is convinced that no settlement can be reached by informal means, unless otherwise specified in this
Collective Agreement.
11.10.6 All communications required under these procedures shall be in writing and shall be delivered by registered mail
or with written proof of receipt.
11.10.7 No technical violation or irregularity occasioned by clerical, typographical or technical error in the written
specification of the grievance shall prevent the substance of a grievance from being heard and judged on its merits.
11.10.8 All Parties to a grievance shall be bound by and shall promptly implement all decisions arrived at under the
procedures described in this Article.
11.10.9 Applicability of Grievance Procedures
(a) The following decisions will not be subject to grievance:
(i) Non-renewal of term appointments as per Article 5.20 – Appointment and
Renewal;
(ii) The award of a merit increment as per
Article 8.25 – Merit Increments.
(b) The following decisions will be subject to grievance only in the case of allegations of either violations of academic
freedom, significant procedural irregularities or discrimination:
(i) The non-renewal of a probationary appointment when the Vice-President,
Academic confirms a negative recommendation of an
FPC/FFPC/LPC;
(ii) The denial of a first application for promotion to a particular rank when the Vice-President, Academic confirms a
negative recommendation of an
FPC/FFPC/LPC (and the denial of a second application for promotion
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 207

Collective Agreement 2008-11 where the two (2) applications are made in consecutive years);
(iii) The denial of an early application for tenure when the Vice-President,
Academic confirms a negative recommendation of an
FPC/FFPC/LPC;
(iv) The decision of the Vice-President,
Academic, regarding academic workload as per paragraph 5.40.6 (d) of Article 5.40 – Academic Workload.
(c) Grievances concerning Renewal as per
Article 5.20 – Appointment and Renewal, concerning tenure as per Article 5.60 –
Tenure Evaluation Procedures, and concerning promotion as per Article 5.65 –
Promotion Procedures, shall proceed directly to arbitration as set forth in Article 11.15 –
Arbitration Procedure.
(d) Grievances concerning dismissal as per
Article 5.80 – Dismissal Procedures shall proceed directly to Step 2 – Formal Grievance
Procedure as set forth in this Article.
11.10.10 Step 1 – Informal Grievance Procedure
The Union and the Employer agree to make reasonable efforts to settle grievances promptly by informal and amicable
means. Thus, the grievor shall first attempt to get the matter under question resolved by informal means within thirty (30)
working days of the date upon which the grievor had notice of the event or decision giving rise to the grievance.
This would normally involve contacting the
Dean/University Librarian concerned before bringing the matter to the Vice-President, Academic.
However, this does not preclude making the Vice-
President, Academic aware of such a grievance, nor does it preclude a grievance from being addressed to the
Vice-President, Academic initially or early on in the process.
11.10.11 Step 2 – Formal Grievance Procedure
(a) The grievor shall present a notice of grievance in writing to the Vice-President,
Academic in the case of a Member, or to the
President of the Union in the case of the
Employer, within thirty (30) working days of the date upon which the grievor had notice of the event or decision giving rise
to the grievance. The notice of grievance shall
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 208

Collective Agreement 2008-11 specify the matter(s) in dispute, the article(s) alleged to have been violated, and the
remedy sought.
(b) In the event of a grievance concerning renewal, tenure or promotion as per paragraph 11.10.9 (c) above, the notice of
grievance shall also include the name of the grievor’s appointee to the Arbitration Panel.
(c) No later than fifteen (15) working days following the receipt of the grievance, the
Employer representative shall meet with the
Union representative. The Parties shall make every reasonable attempt to resolve the grievance.
(d) If the grievance is resolved at this stage, such settlement shall be reduced to writing and countersigned by the Union
representative and the Employer representative within fifteen
(15) working days of the meeting at which the settlement was reached.
(e) In the event that the Union representative and the Employer representative cannot resolve the grievance within fifteen
(15) working days of the meeting(s) specified in paragraph
11.10.11 (c), the Employer representative shall forward in writing to the Union representative the reasons for denying the
grievance.
ARTICLE 11.15 – ARBITRATION PROCEDURE
11.15.1 (a) Failing settlement and/or timely response under the foregoing grievance procedure, any grievance may then
be submitted to arbitration as hereinafter provided under its own distinct arbitral procedure. If no written request for
arbitration is received within thirty
(30) working days after the decision of the
Vice President, Academic or the Union
President under Step 2 – Formal Grievance
Procedure of the grievance procedure is given, the grievance shall be deemed to have been abandoned.
(b) When either Party requests that any matter be submitted to Arbitration as provided in this Article, it shall make such
request in writing addressed to the other Party of this
Collective Agreement, and at the same time appoint a nominee. Within fifteen (15) working days thereafter, the other
Party shall appoint its nominee, provided however, that if such Party fails to appoint its nominee as herein required, the
Minister of Labour for
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 209

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Ontario shall have the power to make such appointment upon application thereto by the
Party invoking the arbitration procedure. The two (2) nominees shall attempt to agree upon a chairperson of the
Arbitration Board.
If they are unsuccessful in agreeing upon such a chairperson within a period of twenty
(20) working days of the appointment of the second nominee, they shall request the
Minister of Labour for Ontario to appoint a chairperson.
(c) The time limits specified in this Article may be extended by mutual agreement by the
Parties. However, the thirty (30) working day time limit set out in paragraph 11.15.1
(a) above referring a grievance to arbitration shall not be waived and/or extended pursuant to the Labour Relations Act,
1995.
Moreover, an arbitrator shall be bound by this provision.
(d) Saturdays, Sundays, Recognised and other
Holidays identified in Article 7.10 –
Recognized and Other Holidays including the customary December – January recess as well as the months of July and
August are not to be counted in the time limits set out in this
Article.
11.15.2 No person may be appointed to the Arbitration
Board who has been involved in an attempt to negotiate or settle the grievance.
11.15.3 The Arbitration Board shall not be authorized to make any decisions inconsistent with the provisions of this
Collective Agreement, nor to alter, modify, add to, or amend any part of this Collective
Agreement.
11.15.4 No matter may be submitted to arbitration which has not been properly carried through all requisite steps of the
Grievance Procedure hereinbefore set out unless otherwise agreed to in writing between the Parties.
11.15.5 The proceedings of the Arbitration Board will be expedited by the Parties hereto, and the decision of the majority
and, where there is no majority, the decision of the chairperson will be final and binding upon the Parties hereto, and the
Employee or
Employees concerned.
11.15.6 Each of the Parties hereto will bear the expenses of the nominee appointed by it, and the Parties will share
equally the fees and expenses, if any, of the chairperson of the Arbitration Board.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 210

Collective Agreement 2008-11
11.15.7 Wherever the term “Arbitration Board” is referred to in this Collective Agreement, the Parties hereto may mutually
agree, in writing, to substitute a mutually agreeable arbitrator for the Arbitration Board at the time of reference to
arbitration and the other provisions referring to Arbitration Board shall appropriately apply.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 211

Collective Agreement 2008-11
STRIKES AND LOCKOUTS
ARTICLE 12.10 – STRIKES AND LOCKOUTS
12.10.1 The University and the Union hereby agree that there shall not be, during the currency of this Collective
Agreement, any lockout by the University or any strike by Members of the Union.
12.10.2 A Member shall not be dismissed per Article 5.80 –
Dismissal Procedures or disciplined per Article 5.75 –
Disciplinary Measures for refusing to cross a picket line on campus which has been established in full compliance with
existing laws. The Employer may, however, dock such a Member's salary by one three hundred and sixty-fifth (1/365) for
each day lost.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 212

Collective Agreement 2008-11
VALIDITY, DURATION AND CONTINUANCE OF THE
COLLECTIVE AGREEMENT
ARTICLE 13.10 – VALIDITY OF THE COLLECTIVE
AGREEMENT
13.10.1 In the event of any of the provisions of this Collective
Agreement or any practices established hereby being contrary to the provisions of any applicable law hereinafter enacted,
this Collective Agreement shall not be deemed to be abrogated, but shall be amended so as to conform with the
regulations of any such law.
ARTICLE 13.15 – DURATION AND CONTINUANCE OF THE
COLLECTIVE AGREEMENT
13.15.1 This Collective Agreement shall come into effect upon ratification by the Parties and shall continue in effect to
June 30, 2011 and shall continue from year to year thereafter unless either Party gives the other
Party notice in writing, not more than one hundred and fifty (150) days but not less than one hundred and twenty (120)
days prior to the thirtieth (30th) of
June in 2011 or in any year following June 30, 2011, that it desires to amend or terminate this Collective
Agreement.
13.15.2 If notice is given as provided in clause 13.15.1 above, the two Parties to this Collective Agreement shall meet
within ten (10) days.
13.15.3 During any period of negotiations, this Collective
Agreement shall remain in force. If a new Collective
Agreement has not been ratified by both Parties by
June 30 of the year in which notice has been given as provided for in clause 13.15.1 above, then all the provisions of this
Collective Agreement shall continue in force (but these provisions shall not constitute a
Collective Agreement) until either:
(a) A new Collective Agreement has been ratified by both Parties. or
(b) Following conciliation, a strike or lockout is declared in accordance with the Ontario
Labour Relations Act, 1995.
13.15.4 At least ten (10) days before the termination of this
Collective Agreement, a separate memorandum which shall continue in force thereafter, shall be signed by the Parties to
the effect that in the event of a strike or lockout,
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 213

Collective Agreement 2008-11
(a) Members whose ongoing research requires access to University facilities in order to prevent irreparable damage to
research facilities (such as loss of live and/or decomposable materials) shall be allowed access to the facilities usually
associated with such research. Such access will be limited to maintaining the facilities and shall not be used to continue
the research. Such Members shall give notice in writing of their access requirements to the President of the Union and to
their Deans/University Librarian. Such notice will normally be given at least ten (10) days before the date of termination of
the
Collective Agreement.
(b) The Union will assume the costs of maintaining Members' eligibility in the
University's hospital, extended health and dental care plans.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 214

Collective Agreement 2008-11
APPENDIX A-1
[1995 OLRB Designation of the Bargaining Unit]
ONTARIO LABOUR RELATIONS BOARD
FILE NO. 3328-93-R
BETWEEN:
Laurentian University Faculty Association "Applicant" v.
Laurentian University of Sudbury "Responding Party"
BEFORE:
Kevin Whitaker, Vice-Chair, and
Board Members J.A. Rundle and P.V. Grasso.
DECISION OF THE BOARD:
October 31, 1995
1. This is an application for combination of bargaining units pursuant to section 7(1) of the Labour Relations
Act to which the responding party has consented.
2. The applicant seeks the combination of two bargaining units consisting of employees of the responding party all of
whom are represented by the applicant trade union.
3. Having regard to the agreement of the parties dated
October 26, 1995, and the provisions of section 7(1) of the Act, the combination of the units requested is granted. The
applicant's bargaining rights now pertain to the following combined bargaining unit:
All members of faculty, including professional librarians, employed by Laurentian University of
Sudbury in the Regional Municipality of Sudbury, save and except administrators at or above the rank of director,
academic staff, at or above the rank of dean, registrar, special assistant to the president, director of academic staff
relations, translators, director of the library, director of graduate studies and research, members of the board of governors,
and athletic coaches required as part of their duties to teach degree credit activity courses.
For the purposes of clarity the parties agree that:
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 215

Collective Agreement 2008-11
1) The bargaining unit does not include full-time faculty members employed by Laurentian
University for a period of not more than one year while on leave from another university, persons employed through the
centre for continuing education to conduct instruction at off-campus centres located outside the
Regional Municipality of Sudbury or through distance education delivery modes, persons employed to teach courses
intended primarily for students who are not registered in a degree credit programme, persons assigned responsibility for
teaching portions of courses coordinated by regular faculty members, such as teaching assistants, field consultants in
social work, clinical teachers in nursing, laboratory technicians, clinical instructors, or outdoor school instructors.
2) The designation "members of the faculty including librarians" is deemed to include those aforementioned employees of
Laurentian University who from time to time may be required to teach outside the City of
Sudbury, unless otherwise excluded.
4. The effective date of this combination of the said bargaining units should be the earlier of (1) the date upon which the
parties become bound by a collective agreement covering the current part-time bargaining unit, or (2) the date upon which
notice to bargain is given by either party with respect to the renewal of the current collective agreement between the
parties covering the full-time bargaining unit.
5. The expiry date of any first collective agreement covering the current part-time bargaining unit shall be the expiry date
of the current collective agreement between the parties in respect of the current full-time bargaining unit, notwithstanding
section 41(8) of the
Labour Relations Act, unless the parties agree otherwise in writing.
"KEVIN WHITAKER" for the Board
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 216

Collective Agreement 2008-11
APPENDIX A-2
[1979 OLRB Designation of the Bargaining Unit (for reference only)]
OLRB CERTIFICATE AND DECISION
THE LABOUR RELATIONS ACT
BEFORE THE ONTARIO LABOUR RELATIONS BOARD
BETWEEN:
Laurentian University Faculty Association "Applicant", -and-
Laurentian University of Sudbury "Respondent".
CERTIFICATE
Upon the application of the applicant and in accordance with the provisions of The Labour
Relations Act, THIS BOARD DOTH CERTIFY
Laurentian University Faculty Association as the bargaining agent of all full-time members of faculty including full-time
professional librarians employed by
Laurentian University of Sudbury, Ontario, to whom at least fifty per cent of the salary at the University is paid by the
University, save and except President,
Vice-President, Academic, Special Assistant to the
President, Deans, Director of the School of Graduate
Studies, Directeur du Conseil de l'enseignement en français, Director of the Library, part-time members of faculty,
technicians, faculty members employed by
Laurentian University for a period of not more than one year while on leave from another university or other employer and
members of the Board of
Governors.
This certificate is to be read subject to the terms of the Board's decision(s) in this matter and, accordingly, by the
bargaining unit described herein is to be read subject to any qualifications referred to in the said decision(s) of the Board.
DATED at Toronto this 9th day of July, 1979.
ONTARIO LABOUR RELATIONS BOARD
“D.K. AYNSLEY”
Registrar
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 217

Collective Agreement 2008-11
APPENDIX A-3
[1979 OLRB Decision (for reference only)]
ONTARIO LABOUR RELATIONS BOARD
FILE NO. 1463-78-R
BETWEEN:
Laurentian University Faculty Association
(Applicant), -and-
Laurentian University of Sudbury (Respondent), -and-
Group of Employees (Objectors).
BEFORE:
Arthur Haladner, Vice-Chair and
Board Members J.D. Bell and W.F. Rutherford.
APPEARANCE:
C.M. Mitchell, T. Bartley and R. Kari for the applicant;
K.R. Valin for the respondent;
Jean Eugene Havel for the objectors.
DECISION OF THE BOARD:
1. On November 27, 1978 the applicant, Laurentian
University Faculty Association, applied for certification for a unit of employees of Laurentian
University. This hearing was called for the purpose of considering an objection to the conduct of the representation vote
taken on April 4, 1979 and for the purpose of hearing representations from the parties on the issue of whether certain
persons classified as
"director" should be included or excluded from the bargaining unit.
2. At the hearing the Board indicated that while it regretted the fact that the ballot in this matter had not been printed in
both French and English, it was not, in the circumstances, prepared to direct a new vote having regard to the delay and
prejudice both to the applicant and to the future course of representation proceedings that such a direction would create.
In so ruling, the Board pointed out that the desire for a
French and English ballot had not been communicated until after the vote had been conducted and the results known.
This, despite there having been, prior to the vote, ample opportunity to express that desire. The Board also expressed its
opinion that the absence of a French and English ballot did not affect the outcome of the representation vote. In that vote
the employees voted 107 to 81 in favour of the applicant.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 218

Collective Agreement 2008-11
3. Dealing now with the issue of Director status - the report of the Labour Relations Officer indicates that for the most part
recommendations for hiring are made by the school's academic council or by the faculty as a group, and submitted to
authorities superior to the director where the decision is made.
Apart from Dean Hilldrup, who made one decision and one effective recommendation - after conducting interviews in
South Africa when the senate appointments and promotions committee was not available - the involvement of directors in
the hiring process is minimal.
4. Directors' role in evaluation of faculty members is primarily one of co-ordination, i.e., calling for recommendations from
other faculty members, the school council or the appointments and promotions committee, and submitting them to higher
authorities.
5. Directors submit recommendations on promotions and tenure; however, there was no evidence that their
recommendations, if contrary, outweigh those of the faculty as a group. Moreover, these recommendations are for the
most part made with the participation of faculty members.
6. Directors' recommendations on salary are limited to whether an increase should be granted. They have no discretion to
recommend specific amounts.
7. Directors' role in discipline of faculty members is minimal, being limited to the occasional reprimand - in one of the two
examples given after consultation with faculty and the Dean/Director of the Library.
Directors have no authority to discharge or suspend.
8. One director made a sabbatical recommendation which, as far as she knew, was accepted. However, the others had no
independent involvement with the process, although one thought he could make a negative recommendation.
9. Directors' role in budget formulation is primarily consultative; in preparing budget recommendations, they consult with
the school budget committee or their colleagues, and decisions are made at the
Senate level. Directors have no authority to re-allocate funds having to do with salaries.
10. Directors assign work to the secretaries on the support staff and evaluate their performance.
However, the time spent in the performance of these
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 219

Collective Agreement 2008-11 functions is minimal, and other faculty members are involved.
11. In Carleton University, (1975) OLRB Rep. June 500, the Board pointed out that there are significant differences
between the university model, where decision-making is shared by a peer group, and the industrial model of hierarchic
authority, where ultimate power resides above - typically, with the plant manager - and filters down through a
management chain to the primary level of supervision - the unit supervisor, or foreman. It stated:
While the Board of Governors is, in a general overall sense, responsible for the business operations of the institution, and
the senate for its academic policies, the power of detailed decision-making is diffuse and extends into the institution's
basic organizational unit, the department.
Moreover, management-type-decisions are made not only by the Board of Governors, the senate, the president, the
senior administrative staff, the deans, but by faculty members as well and in more recent times, students, as members of
various committees or boards...Important determinations of general application are made at the higher levels and in this
sense, a parallel with the industrial model remains. What is novel is that many important decisions, narrower in scope and
having to do with the academic and personnel matters applicable to limited groupings, do originate at the department
level, subject only to endorsation at the higher levels.
12. In determining that department chairmen were employees for purposes of the Act and included in the bargaining unit,
the Board in Carleton concluded:
In those areas of greatest importance, hiring, tenure, promotion, dismissal - the dominant role is played by the department
collectively ... in the more routine areas, while some potential for the exercise of independent discretion exists, it is for the
most part narrowly circumscribed. Moreover, in a substantive sense, the decisions in
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 220

Collective Agreement 2008-11 these areas are of limited importance
... In our view, the infrequent exercise of authority over the office staff poses no danger of conflict of interest within the
unit. It is important to emphasize that the overwhelming proportion of the chairperson's duties have nothing whatever to do
with the supervision or control of the department's small clerical staff...
See also University of Windsor, (1977) OLRB
REP. May, 300, where the Board, following Carleton, determined that department heads did not exercise managerial
functions for purposes of section 1(3) (b) of the Act and were, therefore, appropriate members of the academic bargaining
unit.
13. The Board is of the opinion that the Directors, whose status is in dispute, play a similar role in the decision-making
process at Laurentian to that performed by department chairmen in Carleton and department heads in Windsor. While
there are some differences in certain isolated areas, the Board is satisfied that their duties and responsibilities are not in
any fundamental respect different. The evidence is that they play a part in a process of shared decision-making and do
not, in the areas of greatest importance, i.e., hiring, tenure, promotion, and dismissal, play a dominant role which would
entail the risk of a conflict of interest. Our conclusion, after considering the evidence, is that the Directors of the
School of Engineering, Translators and Interpreters,
Nursing, Social Work, Education and Physical
Education do not exercise managerial functions within the meaning of section 1(3) (b) of The Labour
Relations Act and, accordingly, that they are included in the bargaining unit. The Director of the School of
Graduate Studies and Director, Conseil de l'enseignement en français are excluded from the bargaining unit by
agreement of the parties.
14. Having regard to the foregoing, the Board finds that
All full-time members of faculty including full-time professional librarians employed by Laurentian
University of Sudbury at Sudbury,
Ontario, to whom at least fifty per cent of the salary at the University is paid by the University, save and except
President, Vice-President, Academic,
Deans, Director of the School of
Graduate Studies, Directeur du
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 221

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Conseil de l'enseignement en français,
Director of the Library, part-time members of faculty, technicians, faculty members employed by
Laurentian University for a period of not more than one year while on leave from another university or other employer and
members of the Board of Governors constitute a unit of employees of the respondent appropriate for collective bargaining.
CLARITY NOTES
(1) The designation "all full-time faculty including full-time professional librarians employed by
Laurentian University of Sudbury at Sudbury" is deemed to include those aforementioned employees on the payroll of
Laurentian
University who from time to time may be requested to teach at various locations outside the City of Sudbury.
(2) "All full-time faculty (professional librarians) shall mean such persons holding an academic rank at present described
as instructor, lecturer, assistant professor, associate professor or full professor (general librarian, assistant librarian,
associate librarian or full librarian) and whose duties and responsibilities are fifty per cent or more of the full status
employees in the same classification in the same unit.
15. A certificate will issue to the applicant.
"ARTHUR HALADNER"
For the Board
9th July, 1979
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 222

Collective Agreement 2008-11
APPENDIX A-4 (1)
[1994 OLRB Designation of Sessional Bargaining Unit (for reference only)]
ONTARIO LABOUR RELATIONS BOARD
FILE NO. 3329-93-R
BETWEEN:
Laurentian University Faculty Association, "Applicant" and
Laurentian University of Sudbury, "Responding
Party"
CERTIFICATE:
Upon the application of the applicant and in accordance with the provisions of The Labour
Relations Act, THIS BOARD DOTH CERTIFY
Laurentian University Faculty Association as the bargaining agent of all the faculty including part-time professional
librarians employed by Laurentian
University of Sudbury in the City of Sudbury, save and except administrators at or above the rank of
Director, Academic Staff, at or above the rank of
Dean, Registrar, Special Assistant to the President,
Manager of Employment and Staff Relations,
Translators, Director of the Library, Members of the
Board of Governors and athletic coaches required as part of their duties to teach degree credit activity courses.
This certificate is to be read subject to the terms of the Board's decision(s) in this matter and, accordingly, the bargaining
unit described herein is to be read subject to any qualifications referred to in the said decision(s) of the Board.
DATED AT Toronto, Ontario, this 28th day of March,
1994.
ONTARIO LABOUR RELATIONS BOARD
T.A. INNIS
Registrar
The above description of the bargaining unit is subject to the following qualifications:
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 223

Collective Agreement 2008-11
CLARITY NOTE:
For the purposes of clarity, the parties agree that the bargaining unit does not include full-time faculty on reduced
assignments, persons employed through the
Centre for Continuing Education, persons employed to teach courses primarily for students who are not registered in a
degree credit programme, persons not assigned responsibility for teaching one or more degree credit courses such as
Teaching Assistants,
Field Consultants in Social Work, Clinical Teachers in
Nursing, technicians, laboratory, clinical or outdoor school instructors in courses coordinated by faculty members.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 224

Collective Agreement 2008-11
APPENDIX A-4 (2)
[Prefacing notes in the Memorandum of Agreement adding clauses to the 1992-95 Collective Agreement concerning
employment of Sessional (part-time) faculty (for reference only)]
MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT
BETWEEN:
The Laurentian University Faculty Association and
The Board of Governors of Laurentian University of
Sudbury
RE: Terms and Conditions of Employment of the
Sessional (part-time) Bargaining Unit.
Whereas a decision of the Ontario Labour Relations
Board dated 31 October 1995 (a copy of which is attached as an appendix) and the ratification of this
Memorandum of Agreement give effect to a Merger of the previous Full-time Faculty Bargaining Unit and the previous
Sessional Faculty Bargaining Unit, the
1992-1995 Collective Agreement between the above
Parties, subject to the following variations, shall be read as a single Collective Agreement between the
Parties, covering all Members of the new Merged
Bargaining Unit of Full-time and Sessional Members.
This Memorandum of Agreement shall be in force for the period from 1 July 1994 to 31 March 1996, the latter date being
the date to which LUFA 1992-1995 has been extended, pursuant to a notice given under section 35 of the Social Contract
Act (Bill 48).
Sessional Members of the Bargaining Unit shall be covered by the same Collective Agreement articles as Full-time
Members under Sections 0 (The
Agreement), 1 (Relations Between the Union and the
Board), and 8 (Duration of the Agreement) of the
LUFA 1992-95 Collective Agreement, unless otherwise indicated. Sessional Members of the
Bargaining Unit shall also be covered by Articles 2.00
(Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of Academics -
A1 Teaching and A2 Professional Librarianship, only)
2.30 (Personnel Files), 2.40 (Disciplinary Measures),
3.0 (Recognized and Other Holidays), 3.33 (Court
Leaves), and 3.52 (Compassionate Leave).
Additional Articles relevant to Sessional Members only bear number designations not used in LUFA
1992-95.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 225

Collective Agreement 2008-11
All other provisions, those covered by sections 2, 3,
4, 5, 6, and 7, of the LUFA 1992-95 Collective
Agreement shall apply to Sessional Members only when specifically indicated in this Memorandum of
Agreement.
(The clauses of the Memorandum of Agreement appear at the appropriate places in the 1996-97
Collective Agreement)
DATED AT Sudbury, Ontario, this 17th day of
November, 1995.
For Laurentian University Faculty Association
"R.D. Schell", M.A., D.Phil.
LUFA Chief Steward
"Wendy Jerome", Ph.D.
LUFA President
"Gary MacCoubrey", M.A.
"Leda Culliford", M.A.
For the Board of Governors of Laurentian University of Sudbury
"Hermann Falter", Ph.D.
Director, Academic Staff Relations
"Ron Chrysler", C.A.
Vice-President, Administration
"Geoff Tesson", Ph.D.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 226

Collective Agreement 2008-11
APPENDIX B
LETTER OF UNDERSTANDING
BETWEEN:
THE LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY
ASSOCIATION
AND
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY OF SUDBURY
RE: Faculty Members employed by Laurentian
University on Campuses Outside of Sudbury.
WHEREAS the University is now engaged in providing jointly-run programs with Georgian
College of Applied Arts and Technology, on multiple campuses;
AND WHEREAS such initiatives are likely to occur with greater frequency;
AND WHEREAS the expansion of the University’s programs contributes to the health of the University, and provides
greater opportunities for faculty members;
THEREFORE THE PARTIES AGREE AS
FOLLOWS:
1. All Faculty Members employed by Laurentian
University to teach courses for degree credit shall be included in the Bargaining Unit represented by the Union, if they
would be included in the
Bargaining Unit were they teaching in Sudbury.
Persons affected by this will have departmental status in the academic unit at Laurentian to which their appointment
elsewhere belongs, and that academic unit will be involved in the appropriate tenure and promotion processes according
to the
Collective Agreement. However, the terms of the agreement will be interpreted as site specific, such that, for example,
exigency and seniority clauses will apply to the campus on which the program is being offered.
2. Article 1.30 of the Collective Agreement is hereby amended to read as follows:
“The Board recognizes the Association as the exclusive Bargaining Agent for the Bargaining
Unit(s) defined in the OLRB certificates of July 9,
1979, March 28, 1994, and October 31, 1995
(which are attached as appendices to this
Memorandum of Agreement) and any amendments
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 227

Collective Agreement 2008-11 to these certificates, and as defined in the
Memorandum of Agreement between the Parties respecting Faculty Members employed by
Laurentian University on Campuses Outside of
Sudbury.
3. In the event of a closure of an academic unit or program the tenure-stream Members affected by the decision on
campuses outside Sudbury shall have the right either of transfer to the same Unit or program at the Sudbury campus with
the same rights and privileges as they held at the outside campus or, in the event there are no such positions, of
severance equivalent to that provided for in
Articles 7.1 or 7.2 as applicable.
DATED AT Sudbury, Ontario, this 19th day of
September 2005.
“ANIS FARAH”
Dr. Anis Farah for Laurentian University Faculty Association
“HARLEY D’ENTREMONT”
Dr. Harley d’Entremont for Laurentian University of Sudbury
[NOTE: Articles 1.30, 7.1 and 7.2 in the above appendix have been changed to Articles 2.15,
10.10 and 10.15 respectively in the 2008-11
Collective Agreement.]
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 228

Collective Agreement 2008-11
APPENDIX C
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY
SPECIAL VOLUNTARY EARLY RETIREMENT PLAN
1. Laurentian University plans to re-introduce a Special
Voluntary Early Retirement Plan for full-time faculty
Members, hereafter called the Member, effective from July 1, 2008. The purpose of this program is to facilitate renewal of
faculty. Faculty renewal is expected to have a positive impact on the organization through the revitalization of academic
departments and by helping to reduce hiring problems anticipated in the future.
2. The Special Voluntary Early Retirement Plan will provide an early retirement incentive to help make early retirements
possible. These programs are separate from the Pension Plan, and are to be funded through savings in the operating
budget owing to replacement at lower salary levels.
3. The opportunity for this plan is provided by the fact that this program, to a large degree, would be self- financing and
that there will be no or minimum increase in cost to the University.
4. To be eligible for Special Voluntary Early Retirement, the Member must:
(a) be five (5) years or less from the attainment of her/his Normal Retirement Date, and
(b) have completed at least fifteen (15) years of full-time service at Laurentian University as of the proposed date of
commencement of
Special Voluntary Early Retirement.
5. On any July 1 (January 1), a Member who is eligible under the requirements described in the previous clause may
choose to take Special Voluntary Early
Retirement. In such a case the Member shall apply in writing to the Dean/University Librarian of her/his
Faculty/Library by no later than the previous October
1 (April 1).
6. A Member who does not fully meet the eligibility criteria may apply through the Dean/University
Librarian of her/his Faculty/Library for individual consideration. Each application will be assessed on its merits. If the
proposed early retirement is judged
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 229

Collective Agreement 2008-11 to be of benefit to both the Member and the
University, the early retirement incentive as set out in this plan will be made available. The University will consider
applications from individuals who are up to ten (10) years from attainment of their normal retirement date
7. The granting of a Member's application may, but will not normally be delayed by decision of the University.
Such a delay may occur once only and will be for a period of six (6) months to one (1) year.
8. A Member shall be notified by the Vice-President,
Academic by December 1 (June 1) in the year that the Member has applied for Special Voluntary Early
Retirement if the application has been granted for
Special Voluntary Early Retirement to commence the following July 1 (January 1) or is to be delayed for six
(6) months or one (1) year. The Member must confirm her/his decision to take Special Voluntary
Early Retirement by February 1 (August 1) immediately preceding the July 1 (January 1) when the Special Voluntary Early
Retirement period would commence. The Member's confirmation will render the decision final.
9. A Member eligible for Special Voluntary Early
Retirement may request, before October 1 (April 1), a statement of the early retirement incentive and benefit costs for the
following year. All Members applying for Special Voluntary Early Retirement will automatically receive such a statement.
The
Member will receive the statement no later than
November 1 (May 1). A Member eligible for early retirement shall be entitled to receive a one-time reimbursement of up to
four hundred dollars ($400) for the services of a financial consultant (receipts required).
10. A decision to opt for Special Voluntary Early
Retirement is final, and the Member may not return to full-time or part-time employment at Laurentian
University unless requested and agreed to by the
University.
11. The Special Voluntary Early Retirement Period for the individual Member will be in effect from the commencement
date of Special Voluntary Early
Retirement and will continue until the earlier of the
Member's normal retirement date or death or to a maximum of three (3) years.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 230

Collective Agreement 2008-11
12. During the initial year of Special Voluntary Early
Retirement, the Member shall receive an early retirement incentive of one and three quarter percent
(1.75%) of salary (last year of her/his full-time employment) times years or fractions thereof of full- time service at early
retirement to a maximum of fifty percent (50%) of the aforementioned salary. (Leave of absence without pay is not
included in the calculation of a Member's years of service. Years of service under Article 7.35 – Voluntary Reduced
Workload will be prorated according to the percent workload reduction). The Vice-President, Academic may, after
discussion with the Member concerned, increase the incentive percentage to address particular concerns, without
exceeding the fifty percent (50%) maximum. Any increase in the incentive percentage over the formula amount must be
communicated with explanation to the Union.
13. During the subsequent years of Special Voluntary
Early Retirement, the Member shall receive an early retirement incentive increased each year by the percentage increase
of the faculty scale.
14. While on Special Voluntary Early Retirement, the
Member may wish to continue to participate in the
Laurentian University Retirement Plan. In such case the University's share of contributions will be deducted from the early
retirement incentive. The contributions will be based on the salary of the last year of her/his full-time employment
escalated annually by the percentage increase of the faculty salary scale. Furthermore, the Member will be eligible for the
minimum guaranteed pension based upon the aforementioned escalated salary and years of Special Voluntary Early
Retirement of paid pension contributions. In this case the Member will be considered to be on leave with pay and will be
required to pay Canada Pension Plan (CPP) and
Employment Insurance (EI) contributions and will not be eligible to the roll-over provisions described in the next clause.
The aforementioned is subject to the current Revenue Canada Regulations.
15. If the Member chooses not to continue contributing to the Laurentian University Retirement Plan, then she/he could be
treated as though she/he had terminated her/his employment with Laurentian. In that case, the incentive payments could
be treated as a retiring allowance so they would be eligible for roll- over to an RRSP up to the legal limit. The allowable
roll-over amount may be spread over the years of the
Special Voluntary Early Retirement and the remaining incentive amount would be considered
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 231

Collective Agreement 2008-11 income for the sake of calculating the annual RRSP contribution limit. In this case there
would be no deductions for CPP and EI and the Employer's cost would be added to the early retirement incentive.
The Member could collect her/his pension in addition to the incentive if she/he so desired. If the Member is at least sixty
(60) years of age, she/he may be eligible for full or partial CPP benefits, provided she/he has contributed to the plan. For
more information, or to get application forms, call the
Income Security Programs Office, which is listed under Human Resources and Labour Canada of the
Government of Canada. The aforementioned is subject to the current Revenue Canada Regulations.
16. During the Voluntary Early Retirement period, the benefits will apply as follows:
(a) Members considered to be on leave with pay will retain participation in the Group Life
Insurance, Dependant Group Life, Accidental
Death and Dismemberment, Hospital Care,
Extended Medical (including ManuAssist), the dental plan and the Retirees Health Benefit
Plan. The Long-Term Disability plan cannot be continued. Members may also be exempt from the hospital care and
extended medical coverage if they have similar coverage through the group plan of a spouse.
(b) Members no longer considered employees may choose to retain participation in Group
Life Insurance, Dependant Group Life,
Accidental Death and Dismemberment,
Hospital Care, Extended Medical (including
ManuAssist) and the Dental Plan. The Long-
Term Disability plan cannot be continued.
Continued participation in these plans will entitle the Member to receive a subsidy under the Retirees Health Benefit Plan
at normal retirement age.
The cost sharing of the premiums for these benefits will be split according to the cost sharing arrangement in this
Collective Agreement. The life
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 232

Collective Agreement 2008-11 insurance coverage will be based on three (3) times the early retirement incentive up to the
maximum of the benefit plan. If improvements in benefits are provided in subsequent Collective Agreements these
improvements shall be extended to the retirees on
Special Voluntary Early Retirement. Members who go on Special Voluntary Early Retirement will not be eligible for sick
leave. The Employer's cost of those benefit plans in which the Member does not retain participation will be added to the
early retirement incentive. The Employer's cost will be based on the premium charged by the carrier and will not include
the Provincial Sales Tax.
17. Should the Member die during the Special Voluntary
Early Retirement Period, the payment will cease at the end of the month the death occurred. Benefits and Pension
contributions will also terminate as of the end of the month of the Member's death.
18. A Member taking Special Voluntary Early Retirement would enjoy all retiree privileges as well as tuition fee waiver.
19. Admission to the Special Voluntary Early Retirement
Plan will be available under this plan for a four (4) year period i.e. from July 1, 2008 to June 30, 2012. If the Laurentian
University Retirement Plan is amended to provide for additional early retirement provisions to Laurentian University faculty
Employees, the Special Voluntary Retirement Plan will be reviewed at that time.
20. The provisions of this Special Voluntary Early
Retirement Plan shall apply as of the date of approval by the Employer. These provisions may be amended and/or
extended for a further period with the agreement of both the Employer and the Union.
Such decision will be made prior to June 30, 2011.
Early-retired Members at the time of amendment or termination of these provisions will not be disadvantaged by such
amendment or termination.
21. The Parties agree that any early retirement or severance procedures that are not provided for in this Collective
Agreement will be subject to prior approval by the Parties before they are offered to the faculty. The Parties further agree
that individual early retirement or severance agreements that are not provided in this Collective Agreement shall be
subject to the Union’s approval by way of Memorandum of
Agreement.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 233

Collective Agreement 2008-11
DATED AT Sudbury, Ontario, this 22nd day of
September, 2008.
“DAVID LEADBEATER”
Dr. David Leadbeater for Laurentian University Faculty Association
“HARLEY D’ENTREMONT”
Dr. Harley d’Entremont for Laurentian University of Sudbury
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 234

Collective Agreement 2008-11
APPENDIX D
AGREEMENT BETWEEN
THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF LAURENTIAN
UNIVERSITY
AND
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY ASSOCIATION
PHASED RETIREMENT
1. A program for phased retirement over three (3) years was instituted on July 1, 2006 and continues to be in effect.
Members will give notice of their intention to participate in the phased retirement program one (1) year in advance of their
proposed commencement date for phased retirement (which shall be a July 1) to facilitate planning within
Departments/Schools. Such notice of intent will be irrevocable. Phased retirement will be available to full-time Members
(full-time is defined as those with greater than seventy-five percent (75%) appointment), who will first become eligible for
phased retirement three (3) years before they are eligible for an unreduced pension (i.e. at age fifty- nine (59)) and will
remain eligible until age sixty- three (63). A Member in the phased retirement program (the participant) will be expected to
continue the full range of her/his normal pre- program duties as agreed with the Chair and proportionate to her/his
percentage appointment over the three (3) year period. Unless the applicant and the Dean/University Librarian agree
otherwise, the cumulative appointment over the three (3) year phased retirement period will be at least one hundred and
fifty percent (150%) but not more than one hundred and seventy-five percent (175%) of a full-time appointment and will be
subject to a minimum percentage appointment in any one year equal to twenty-five percent (25%) of full-time
appointment. For phased retirement, the cumulative appointment over the two (2) year phased retirement period will be at
least one hundred percent (100%) but not more than one hundred and twenty-five percent (125%) of a full- time
appointment and will be subject to a minimum percentage appointment in any one year equal to twenty-five percent (25%)
of full-time appointment.
2. The participant’s salary during the three (3) year phased retirement period will be prorated on the basis of the part-time
appointment of the participant in each year.
3. The participant will earn pension benefits based on a full-time appointment and assuming a salary in each year of
phased retirement program equal to
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 235

Collective Agreement 2008-11 participant’s one hundred percent (100%) nominal salary. The participant’s contributions to
the pension plan will be based on her/his nominal salary in each year of the phased retirement.
4. Group benefit coverage will continue as though the participant continued to be employed on a full-time appointment
throughout the phased retirement program, except as set out in this clause with respect to life insurance, physical and
mental leave and Long-Term Disability.
Life insurance coverage (prior to Normal Retirement
Date) shall be based upon the participant’s pre- program salary.
The participant shall be covered by the policy on
Physical and Mental Illness leave, and shall be compensated on the basis of her/his actual salary received during the
period of phased retirement.
Long-Term Disability benefits will be payable only up to the participant’s irrevocable retirement date, or if earlier, the
Normal Retirement Date, with such benefits being calculated according to the actual salary during the phased retirement,
subject to plan requirements. A participant who is eligible and qualifies for Long-Term Disability benefits during the
phased retirement program may opt out of the phased retirement program and retire instead of receiving Long-Term
Disability benefits.
5. The participant will also be eligible to receive a
Retiring Allowance equal to seventy-five percent
(75%) of the one hundred percent (100%) nominal salary in effect immediately prior to the commencement of phased
retirement, less deductions required by law (the “Retiring
Allowance”). For a two (2) year phased retirement, the Retiring Allowance shall be fifty percent (50%).
The Retiring Allowance will be payable in three (3) equal annual instalments over the phased three (3) year retirement
period and two (2) equal annual instalments over the phased two (2) year retirement period, subject to confirmation by the
Canada
Revenue Agency satisfactory to the Employer that such payments will qualify for retiring allowance treatment. Should an
arrangement in this form not be accepted by Canada Revenue Agency as a
Retiring Allowance, the Employer agrees to work with the Union to make such amendments as are required to satisfy the
Canada Revenue Agency.
Otherwise, the Retiring Allowance will be paid in the form of a single lump sum payment at the end of the phased
retirement. In the event that a participant dies prior to receiving her/his full entitlement under this section, the balance of
the
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 236

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Retiring Allowance shall be paid to the participant’s estate.
A participant who has opted out of the phased retirement program under clause 4 above shall receive a prorated share of
her/his Retiring
Allowance.
6. Participants in the phased retirement program will be entitled to full professional development expenditure
reimbursement and will be entitled to participate in all programs that are available to
Members.
DATED AT Sudbury, Ontario, this 21th day of
September 2008.
“DAVID LEADBEATER”
Dr. David Leadbeater for Laurentian University Faculty Association
“HARLEY D’ENTREMONT”
Dr. Harley d’Entremont for Laurentian University of Sudbury
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 237

Collective Agreement 2008-11
APPENDIX E
LETTER OF UNDERSTANDING
BETWEEN:
THE LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY
ASSOCIATION
AND
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY OF SUDBURY
RE: JOINT COMMITTEE ON THE PENSION PLAN
THE PARTIES AGREE TO establish a joint committee of four (4) members, two (2) appointed by the Union and two (2)
appointed by the
Employer, for the purposes of:
1. Discussing and better understanding the pension plan.
2. Determining if there are opportunities for improving the pension plan, specifically focusing on the following issues:
(a) Number of years used for calculating “Best
Average Earnings”
(b) Indexed inflation protection
(c) Contribution levels
(d) Pension formula
3. Recommending to the Parties a plan for improving the pension plan.
4. If the Parties agree that there is a need for extraordinary actuarial services, such costs shall be shared equally by the
Parties.
The Committee shall meet by January 31, 2009 and report by January 31, 2010.
DATED AT Sudbury, Ontario, this 24th day of
September 2008.
“DAVID LEADBEATER”
Dr. David Leadbeater for Laurentian University Faculty Association
“HARLEY D’ENTREMONT”
Dr. Harley d’Entremont for Laurentian University of Sudbury
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 238

Collective Agreement 2008-11
APPENDIX F
AMENDED
LETTER OF UNDERSTANDING
BETWEEN:
THE LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY
ASSOCIATION
AND
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY OF SUDBURY
RE: PENSION AND BENEFITS
THE PARTIES HEREBY AGREE THAT the following changes will be made to the benefit coverage effective November 1,
2002.
Life Insurance: 3 x annual salary to a maximum of
$300,000.
Vision Care Expenses: maximum of $300 every two years.
Dental Plan: payment shall be made in accordance with the current rate schedule as established by the
Ontario Dental Association.
THE PARTIES FURTHER AGREE to implement a supplementary pension plan for all Members who retire after July 1,
2002 as proposed by the plan’s actuary in his letter dated February 17, 2000.
DATED AT Sudbury, Ontario, this 11th day of
September 2002.
“DR. ANIS FARAH” for
Laurentian University
Faculty Association
“DR. HERMANN FALTER” for
Laurentian University of Sudbury
AMENDED LETTER OF UNDERSTANDING
DATED AT
Sudbury, Ontario, this 4th day of February 2009.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 239

Collective Agreement 2008-11
“DAVID LEADBEATER”
Dr. David Leadbeater for Laurentian University Faculty Association
“HARLEY D’ENTREMONT”
Dr. Harley d’Entremont for Laurentian University of Sudbury
[NOTE: The above crossed out language has since been renegotiated and the new language reflecting any changes now
appears in Article 8.45 –
Benefits.]
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 240

Collective Agreement 2008-11
APPENDIX G
LETTER OF UNDERSTANDING
BETWEEN:
THE LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY
ASSOCIATION
AND
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY OF SUDBURY
RE: BENEFIT PROGRAM FOR RETIRED
EMPLOYEES
THE PARTIES HEREBY AGREE TO form a committee consisting of two (2) union representatives and two (2) Employer
representatives to review the benefit plans that are available to retirees that are offered by various insurance or
associations to allow for a seamless transition.
The committee will conclude its findings and produce a report to the Union and the Employer by
December 31, 2009.
The Committee will be provided with the latest actuarial valuation of the Retiree Health Benefit
Plan (RHBP).
DATED AT Sudbury, Ontario, this 24th day of
September 2008.
“DAVID LEADBEATER”
Dr. David Leadbeater for Laurentian University Faculty Association
“HARLEY D’ENTREMONT”
Dr. Harley d’Entremont for Laurentian University of Sudbury
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 241

Collective Agreement 2008-11
APPENDIX H
LETTER OF UNDERSTANDING
BETWEEN:
THE LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY
ASSOCIATION
AND
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY OF SUDBURY
RE: ONGOING REVIEW OF BENEFITS PROGRAM
FOR RETIRED EMPLOYEES
THE PARTIES AGREE THAT the Benefits
Committee should continue to review the benefits for retired employees within the parameters of the original mandate with
the view of:
(a) finding options to improve the existing benefits plan; and
(b) investigating to what extent benefits of the existing plan can be used to offset costs of improving a spousal benefits
plan with a different Employer; the committee will inform the Parties and the retired members of the outcome of the
investigation as soon as it has been completed.
DATED AT Sudbury, Ontario, this 23rd day of
September 1999.
“DR. ANIS FARAH” for
Laurentian University
Faculty Association
“DR. HERMANN FALTER” for
Laurentian University of Sudbury
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 242

Collective Agreement 2008-11
APPENDIX I
LETTER OF UNDERSTANDING
BETWEEN:
THE LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY
ASSOCIATION
AND
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY OF SUDBURY
RE: JOINT COMMITTEE TO REVIEW THE STUDENT
COURSE EVALUATION
THE PARTIES HEREBY AGREE THAT:
1. The Union and the Employer will establish a joint committee to review the student course evaluation form and process
at Laurentian. In developing its recommendations, the Committee will consider concerns about the existing course
evaluation questionnaire and how it is administered, different approaches to course evaluation, and the research literature
on course evaluation. The Committee will give special attention to the evaluation of co-taught courses.
2. The Committee will be constituted by January 30,
2009 and will be composed of three (3) members appointed by the Employer, three (3) members appointed by the Union,
and a seventh member mutually agreed by both Parties to act as chair.
The Committee will produce a report with recommendations to the Parties by January 2010.
3. The Committee will make reasonable efforts to consult widely with students and faculty.
DATED AT Sudbury, Ontario, this 24th day of
September 2008.
“DAVID LEADBEATER”
Dr. David Leadbeater for Laurentian University Faculty Association
“HARLEY D’ENTREMONT”
Dr. Harley d’Entremont for Laurentian University of Sudbury
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 243

Collective Agreement 2008-11
APPENDIX J
LETTER OF UNDERSTANDING
BETWEEN:
THE LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY
ASSOCIATION
AND
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY OF SUDBURY
RE: JOINT COMMITTEE TO STUDY APPREHENSION
OF BIAS
THE PARTIES AGREE TO establish a committee of two (2) representatives chosen by the Union and two (2)
representatives chosen by the Employer to provide guidelines for the applications of the concept of “apprehension of bias”
in university decision-making and in the context of committees operating under this Collective Agreement. The committee
shall be establish by January 15, 2009 and make its report to the Parties by March 15,
2009.
DATED AT Sudbury, Ontario, this 15th day of
September 2008.
“DAVID LEADBEATER”
Dr. David Leadbeater for Laurentian University Faculty Association
“HARLEY D’ENTREMONT”
Dr. Harley d’Entremont for Laurentian University of Sudbury
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 244

Collective Agreement 2008-11
APPENDIX K
LETTER OF UNDERSTANDING
BETWEEN:
THE LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY
ASSOCIATION
AND
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY OF SUDBURY
RE: JOINT COMMITTEE ON COORDINATORS
THE PARTIES AGREE TO establish a committee of six (6) members, three (3) appointed by the
Union and three (3) by the Employer, for the purpose of:
1. Studying the role of coordinators at Laurentian
University, including for graduate, undergraduate,
French and English programs as well as in the
Library. The committee shall consider the role of coordinators in relation to the role of
Chairs/Directors and to Members in fulfilling their administrative service responsibilities.
2. Recommending to the Parties a definition for the coordinator role that facilitates program development and the cohesive
functioning of the
Departments/Schools.
3. Recommending to the Parties a fair and equitable system of teaching/professional library workload reduction for
coordinators.
The Committee will meet by January 15, 2009 and report by October 15, 2009.
DATED AT Sudbury, Ontario, this 14th day of
September 2008.
“DAVID LEADBEATER”
Dr. David Leadbeater for Laurentian University Faculty Association
“HARLEY D’ENTREMONT”
Dr. Harley d’Entremont for Laurentian University of Sudbury
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 245

Collective Agreement 2008-11
APPENDIX L
LETTER OF UNDERSTANDING
BETWEEN:
THE LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY
ASSOCIATION
AND
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY OF SUDBURY
RE: ASBESTOS
THE PARTIES HEREBY AGREE THAT the
Employer shall post on the Occupational Health and
Safety website a recent report on buildings containing asbestos. There will be a link to the
Material Safety Data Sheets for asbestos. The
Joint Health and Safety Committee shall organize information sessions on the report and health consequences of
asbestos.
DATED AT Sudbury, Ontario, this 21st day of
September 2008.
“DAVID LEADBEATER”
Dr. David Leadbeater for Laurentian University Faculty Association
“HARLEY D’ENTREMONT”
Dr. Harley d’Entremont for Laurentian University of Sudbury
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 246

Collective Agreement 2008-11
APPENDIX M
LETTER OF UNDERSTANDING
BETWEEN:
THE LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY
ASSOCIATION
AND
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY OF SUDBURY
RE: BUILDING AND PLANNING COMMITTEE
THE PARTIES HEREBY AGREE THAT the
University negotiating committee will recommend to the Board of Governors that two (2) LUFA representatives be added
to the Building and
Planning Committee.
DATED AT Sudbury, Ontario, this 14th day of
September 2008.
“DAVID LEADBEATER”
Dr. David Leadbeater for Laurentian University Faculty Association
“HARLEY D’ENTREMONT”
Dr. Harley d’Entremont for Laurentian University of Sudbury
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 247

Collective Agreement 2008-11
APPENDIX N
LETTER OF UNDERSTANDING
BETWEEN:
THE LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY
ASSOCIATION
AND
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY OF SUDBURY
RE: UNIVERSAL BUS PASS
THE PARTIES HEREBY AGREE THAT a representative of the Union and a representative of the Employer shall meet
with a representative of the
City of Greater Sudbury, Transit Operation to explore the possibility of negotiating a low-cost
Universal Bus Pass for all full-time and Sessional
Members.
DATED AT Sudbury, Ontario, this 14th day of
September 2008.
“DAVID LEADBEATER”
Dr. David Leadbeater for Laurentian University Faculty Association
“HARLEY D’ENTREMONT”
Dr. Harley d’Entremont for Laurentian University of Sudbury
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 248

Collective Agreement 2008-11
APPENDIX O
STANDARD LETTER OF APPOINTMENT
(The actual letter may contain additional information)
DAY/MONTH/YEAR
Dr. XXX
ADDRESS
Dear Dr. XXX
On the recommendation of the Dean of (FACULTY) /
University Librarian and the (DEPARTMENT/SCHOOL) we are pleased to offer you an appointment at Laurentian
University.
The terms of the offer are shown on the enclosed form. If they are acceptable, please sign and return one copy.
A copy of the Collective Agreement with the Laurentian
University Faculty Association can be found at the following website: http://www.lufapul.ca/ColAgree.htm
This offer is conditional on your being legally entitled to work in
Canada. Please call me if you have any questions concerning your entitlement to work in Canada.
Please note in the enclosed offer the requirement that you furnish proof of educational credentials. All appointments at
Laurentian University are conditional upon this requirement being fulfilled. The requirement can be met by you bringing to
the Vice-President, Academic the original degree or diploma for photocopying, or by the educational institution submitting
directly to my office either a transcript or a certification that the stated degree or diploma has been granted.
This offer remains open until (DATE). If you require more time to consider this offer, please contact me as soon as
possible and in any event before the offer expires.
If you have any questions, please do not hesitate to contact me.
Sincerely,
Vice-President, Academic
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 249

Collective Agreement 2008-11
Enclosures
OFFER OF EMPLOYMENT TO
(Subject to changes in the new Collective Agreement)
DR. XXXX
DATE
1. DEPARTMENT/SCHOOL. This appointment is in the
Department/School of XXX.
2. TYPE OF APPOINTMENT. This is a XXX appointment.
3. EFFECTIVE DATE. The effective date of this appointment will be Day/Month/Year. End date if applicable.
4. RANK. This appointment will be at the rank of XXX based on your qualifications and years of experience according to
Article 5.10 – Academic Qualifications
Guidelines.
5. SALARY. Your starting salary will be XXX per annum based on XXX years of university experience and
XXX years of other experience relevant to your discipline as well as other factors affecting faculty recruitment in your field.
Your salary, benefits and other provisions will be adjusted according to any new Collective Agreement between the
Employer and the Union.
6. LENGTH OF PROBATIONARY PERIOD. The normal probationary period is five (5) academic years in length.
(Because of your previous experience at
Laurentian, the normal probationary period may be reduced by xxx years. Please confirm in writing should you wish to
accept that reduction.) You will be considered for tenure in the fifth (5th) academic year
(academic year 20x/20xx) following the effective date of this appointment. If tenure is not granted, your appointment will
terminate at the end of that academic year (XXX). If tenure is granted, it will be effective on the first (1st) day of the
following academic year (day/month/year).
You may apply and be considered for tenure in the fourth academic year (academic year XXX) following the effective date
of this appointment per paragraph
5.60.3 (a) of Article 5.60 – Tenure Evaluation
Procedures.
7. RENEWAL. As per clause 5.20.22 of Article 5.20 –
Appointment and Renewal, in September 20XX, you
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 250

Collective Agreement 2008-11 will undergo an initial contract renewal which if successful will be followed by a further two
(2) year probationary appointment.
8. SABBATICAL LEAVE. As per Article 7.25 –
Sabbatical Leaves, you will be eligible to apply for a sabbatical leave of one (1) year to commence after six (6) academic
years of service, less XXX years of credit that you have been granted, in a full-time academic capacity for service.
9. RESPONSIBILITIES. Your responsibilities are outlined in Article 5.15 – Rights, Responsibilities and
Duties of Academics and will include teaching and academic guidance of students, scholarly activity, and service to the
University.
10. BILINGUAL REQUIREMENT. As per Article 3.30 –
Bilingualism, you are required to become passively bilingual as a condition of tenure. If needed, the
Employer will provide language training and in any year you take such training you will be relieved of the requirement to
participate in university governance beyond the Department/School level.
11. RELEASE TIME. Your normal teaching load will be reduced by one (1) course (six (6) credit equivalent) during your
first (1st) year (if applicable).
12. PHYSICAL AND MENTAL ILLNESS. You are eligible for sick leave up to a maximum of six (6) months at full salary
from the date of disability due to accident or illness, for each separate disability cause as per
Article 7.55 – Physical and Mental Illness.
13. LONG-TERM DISABILITY. You will be required to join the Long-Term Disability insurance plan which provides
benefits after six (6) months of uninterrupted total disability.
14. LIFE INSURANCE INCLUDING ACCIDENTAL
DEATH AND DISMEMBERMENT. You will be required to join the life insurance plan. You may supplement your coverage
by purchasing optional life insurance, the premiums for which are fully paid by the Employee.
15. EXTENDED MEDICAL AND DENTAL CARE
PLANS. You will be eligible to join the Extended
Medical and Dental Care Plans.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 251

Collective Agreement 2008-11
16. PENSION. You are required to join the pension plan effective your date of appointment.
17. VACATION. You will be entitled to an annual vacation of twenty-five (25) days during your first (1st) year and
thereafter as per Article 7.15 – Vacation.
18. TUITION FEE EXEMPTION. This policy covers a person employed full-time by the University from the first (1st) day of
her/his appointment and her/his spouse and dependent children from the same date.
19. START-UP GRANT. You will be provided with a start- up research/creative activity grant of XXX. These funds must be
used and expended in accordance with the University policy on start-up grants.
20. PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
EXPENDITURES. You will be provided XXX for the first (1st) year for your professional development expenditures and
thereafter as per Article 6.45 –
Professional Development Expenditures.
21. MOVING EXPENSES. The Employer will reimburse claims at the rate of one-hundred percent (100%) to a maximum
of five-thousand dollars ($5,000). Moving expenses paid to a new Member constitute a loan made by the University. This
loan will be retired when the Member has completed three (3) years of continuous service to the University, each year
being equivalent to one-third (1/3) of the reimbursement of the loan.
22. LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY
ASSOCIATION. This appointment is subject to a
Collective Agreement between the Board of
Governors of Laurentian University and the
Laurentian University Faculty Association. The current Collective Agreement is for a term ending
2011. Monthly dues to the Union will be deducted from your salary.
23. PROOF OF STATED EDUCATIONAL
QUALIFICATIONS. It is University policy that all persons appointed to positions of both an academic and non-academic
nature, part-time or full-time, furnish proof of their stated educational credentials to the Vice-President, Academic. This
offer of employment is conditional upon this requirement being fulfilled by you in respect of your latest degree.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 252

Collective Agreement 2008-11
24. OTHER TERMS. a) Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, this probationary appointment will terminate
automatically if you are not granted a tenured appointment. Laurentian
University makes no promises concerning the possibility of further or other appointments, including a tenured
appointment.
25. CONSISTENCY WITH COLLECTIVE AGREEMENT.
This offer is made pursuant to the Collective
Agreement and the Collective Agreement shall prevail in case of any inconsistency between the terms of this Offer and
the terms of the Collective
Agreement.
Vice-President, Academic Date
I hereby accept the conditions of employment set out in this document.
NAME Date
/nbm c.c.: Dean
Financial Services
Human Resources
Institutional Research
Laurentian University Faculty Association
Payroll and Benefits Centre
DATED AT Sudbury, Ontario, this 21st day of
September 2008.
“DAVID LEADBEATER”
Dr. David Leadbeater for Laurentian University Faculty Association
“HARLEY D’ENTREMONT”
Dr. Harley d’Entremont for Laurentian University of Sudbury
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 253

Collective Agreement 2008-11
APPENDIX P
MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT
BETWEEN:
THE LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY FACULTY
ASSOCIATION
AND
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY OF SUDBURY
RE: COLLECTIVE AGREEMENT EDITORIAL
COMMITTEE
THE PARTIES HEREBY AGREE TO form a
Collective Agreement Editorial Committee headed by the two (2) chief negotiators or their designates with responsibility to
incorporate all new clauses upon which the Parties have agreed, verify the translation of all new material, delete
inoperative appendices and provide a comprehensive index with the new 2008-11 Collective Agreement.
DATED AT Sudbury, Ontario, this 24th day of
September 2008.
“DAVID LEADBEATER”
Dr. David Leadbeater for Laurentian University Faculty Association
“HARLEY D’ENTREMONT”
Dr. Harley d’Entremont for Laurentian University of Sudbury
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2008 June 2011 FINAL english ocr Page 254

COLLECTIVE
AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
THE LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY
FACULTY ASSOCIATION
AND
THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF
LAURENTIAN UNIVERSITY
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 1

Collective Agreement 2011-14
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
Article 1.10 – Title 1
Article 1.15 – Official Languages 1
Article 1.20 – Purpose of the Collective 1
Agreement
1
Article 1.25 – Objects and Purposes of the
University 1
Article 1.30 – Definitions 2
Article 1.35 – Copies 5
RELATIONS BETWEEN THE UNION AND THE
EMPLOYER
Article 2.10 – Recognition of the Employer 6
Article 2.15 – Recognition of the Bargaining Unit 6
Article 2.20 – Employment of Non-Members 6
Article 2.25 – Senior Academic Administrators 7
Article 2.30 – Existing Practices 8
Article 2.35 – Modifications to the Legal Status of the University 9
Article 2.40 – Rights And Privileges of the Union 9
Article 2.45 – Dues Check Off 11
Article 2.50 – Information 12
Article 2.55 – Correspondence 16
Article 2.60 – Joint Consultative Committee for the Administration of the Collective
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 2

Collective Agreement 2011-14
WORKING CONDITIONS
Article 3.10 – Academic Freedom 19
Article 3.15 – No Discrimination, Harassment or 19
Bullying
Article 3.20 – Working Environment 21
Article 3.25 – Health, Safety and Security 22
Article 3.30 – Bilingualism 23
Article 3.35 – Conflict of Interest 24
SESSIONAL MEMBERS
Article 4.10 – Appointment Provisions for 26
Sessional Members
Article 4.15 – Appointment and Renewal for 26
Sessional Members
Article 4.20 – Permanent Appointments for 31
Sessional Members
Article 4.25 – Workload Provisions for Sessional 33
Members
Article 4.30 – Teaching Rights and 34
Responsibilities for Sessional
Members
Article 4.35 – Annual Report for Sessional 35
Members
Article 4.40 – Withdrawal of Seniority for 36
Sessional Members
Article 4.45 – Physical and Mental Illness for 37
Sessional Members
Article 4.50 – Family Responsibility for Sessional 38
Members
Article 4.55 – Rates of Pay for Sessional 38
Members
Article 4.60 – Physical Education Facilities for 41
Sessional Members
Article 4.65 – Exemption from Tuition Fees for 41
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 3

Collective Agreement 2011-14
Article 4.70 – Professional Development 41
Expenditures for Sessional
Members
ACADEMIC CAREER
Article 5.10 – Academic Qualifications 42
Guidelines
Article 5.15 – Rights, Responsibilities and Duties 47 of Academics
Article 5.20 – Appointment and Renewal 55
Article 5.25 – Employment Equity 64
Article 5.30 – Aboriginal Equity Initiative 66
Article 5.35 – Newly Hired Members 66
Article 5.40 – Academic Workload 66
Article 5.45 – Annual Report for Members 75
Article 5.50 – Assessment of a Member's 75
Performance
Article 5.55 – Faculty/Francophone 85
Faculty/Library Personnel
Committee
Article 5.60 – Tenure Evaluation Procedures 91
Article 5.65 – Promotion Procedures 94
Article 5.70 – Personnel Files 96
Article 5.75 – Disciplinary Measures 99
Article 5.80 – Dismissal Procedures 101
Article 5.85 – Resignation 103
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 4

Collective Agreement 2011-14
RESEARCH, CREATIVITY AND
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
Article 6.10 – Research and Creativity 105
Article 6.15 – Research, Creativity and 105
Development Office
Article 6.20 – Research and Development 106
Support
Article 6.25 – Laurentian University Research 106
Fund (LURF)
Article 6.30 – Patents 108
Article 6.35 – Copyright 110
Article 6.40 – Committee on Patents and 113
Copyright
Article 6.45 – Professional Development 115
Expenditures
LEAVES
Article 7.10 – Recognized and Other Holidays 117
Article 7.15 – Vacation 117
Article 7.20 – Absence General 118
Article 7.25 – Sabbatical Leaves 119
Article 7.30 – Study Leaves 130
Article 7.35 – Voluntary Reduced Workload 133
Article 7.40 – Leaves of Absence Without Pay 135
Article 7.45 – Court Leaves 136
Article 7.50 – Political Leaves 137
Article 7.55 – Physical and Mental Illness 138
Article 7.60 – Pregnancy, Parental and Adoption 142
Leaves
Article 7.65 – Special Leaves 147
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 5

Collective Agreement 2011-14
SALARY AND BENEFITS
Article 8.10 – Salary Structure 148
Article 8.15 – Progress Through the Ranks 150
Increments
Article 8.20 – Procedures for the Award/Denial 151 of a Progress Through the Ranks
Increment
Article 8.25 – Merit Increments 153
Article 8.30 – Additional Qualifications 154
Increments
Article 8.35 – Overloads 155
Article 8.40 – Distance Education Courses 156
Article 8.45 – Benefits 157
Article 8.50 – Tuition Fee Exemption and 161
Spousal Library Card
Article 8.55 – Moving Expenses 163
Article 8.60 – Physical Education Facilities 163
Article 8.65 – Public Liability Insurance 164
Article 8.70 – Parking 164
Article 8.75 – Reimbursement of Expenses 164
Article 8.80 – Policy and Procedures in the 165
Event of Death
Article 8.85 – Salary to Beneficiary in the Event 167 of Death of Faculty Member
CHAIRS AND DIRECTORS
Article 9.10 – Duties of Chairs/Directors 168
Article 9.15 – Selection of Chairs/Directors 170
Article 9.20 – Term of Office of Chairs/Directors 173
Article 9.25 – Teaching Load Reductions and 173
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 6

Collective Agreement 2011-14
Article 9.30 – Removal from Office of 174
Chairs/Directors
REDUNDANCY AND FINANCIAL EXIGENCY
Article 10.10 – Redundancy 176
Article 10.15 – Financial Exigency 183
GRIEVANCE AND ARBITRATION
Article 11.10 – Grievance Procedure 189
Article 11.15 – Arbitration Procedure 192
STRIKES AND LOCKOUTS
Article 12.10 – Strikes and Lockouts 194
VALIDITY, DURATION AND CONTINUANCE
OF THE COLLECTIVE AGREEMENT
Article 13.10 – Validity of the Collective 194
Agreement
Article 13.15 – Duration and Continuance of the 194
Collective Agreement
APPENDICES
A-1 OLRB Designation of the 196
Bargaining Unit
A-2 1979 OLRB Designation of the 198
Bargaining
Unit (For Reference Only)
A-3 1979 OLRB Decision (For 199
Reference Only)
A-4 (1) 1994 OLRB Designation of 204
Sessional Bargaining Unit (For
Reference Only)
A-4 (2) Memorandum of Agreement Terms 206 and Conditions of Employment for
Sessional
(Part-Time) Bargaining Unit (For
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 7

Collective Agreement 2011-14
B Faculty Members Employed by 208
Laurentian University on Campuses
Outside of Sudbury
C Special Voluntary Early Retirement 210
Plan
D Joint Committee to Study 216
Apprehension of Bias
E Joint Committee on Coordinators 217
F Standard Letter of Appointment 218
G Collective Agreement Editorial 223
Committee
H Joint Committee on the Banking 224 and Owing of Teaching Credits
I Expedited Grievance and 225
Arbitration Process
J Assessment Forms 227
K Departmental/School Assessment – 228
Contract Renewal
L Departmental/School Assessment – 230
Tenure
M Departmental/School Assessment – 232
Promotion to rank of Assistant
Professor/Librarian
N Departmental/School Assessment – 234
Promotion to rank of Associate
Professor/Librarian
O Departmental/School Assessment – 236
Promotion to rank of Full
Professor/Librarian
P Departmental/School Assessment – 238
Merit Increment
Q FPC/FFPC/LPC Assessment Review 241
Form
Joint committee to review the student
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 8

Collective Agreement 2011-14
INTRODUCTION
ARTICLE 1.10 – TITLE
1.10.1 The official title of this Collective Agreement shall be
"The Collective Agreement between the Laurentian
University Faculty Association and the Board of
Governors of Laurentian University". Hereinafter, this title shall be referred to as the Collective Agreement.
ARTICLE 1.15 – OFFICIAL LANGUAGES
1.15.1 Both the English and French versions of the
Collective Agreement shall be official and definitive versions. Both Parties may use either the English or the French
version in any proceedings arising out of the Collective Agreement, and shall apply the version of the Collective
Agreement in which formal grievance/arbitration proceedings were initiated.
1.15.2 The Parties agree to cooperate to have the
Collective Agreement translated within ninety (90) days from the version negotiated at the table into the other official
language of Canada. The Parties will share equally in the cost of the translation.
ARTICLE 1.20 – PURPOSE OF THE COLLECTIVE
AGREEMENT
1.20.1 It is the purpose of this Collective Agreement:
(a) To set forth terms and conditions relating to employment, remuneration and benefits.
(b) To maintain a harmonious relationship between the Union and the Employer by providing amicable means for settling
differences which may arise between them from time to time.
(c) To encourage the efficient and responsible conduct of the life and work of the University.
(d) To foster a working environment which motivates Members to achieve the objects and purposes of the University.
ARTICLE 1.25 – OBJECTS AND PURPOSES OF THE
UNIVERSITY
1.25.1 The objects and purposes of the University, as set out in the Act, are:
(a) The advancement of learning and the dissemination of knowledge; and
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 9

Collective Agreement 2011-14
(b) The intellectual, social, moral and physical development of its members and the betterment of society.
1.25.2 The Parties agree to cooperate in the pursuit of these objects and purposes.
ARTICLE 1.30 – DEFINITIONS
1.30.1 For the purpose of this Collective Agreement the following words shall bear the definition indicated herein except
as otherwise provided in this Collective
Agreement:
(a) Laurentian University of Sudbury Act shall mean the Laurentian University of Sudbury
Act, being Chapter 151 of the Statutes of
Ontario for the year 1960 as amended by
Chapter 154, 1961-62.
(b) University shall mean Laurentian University of
Sudbury.
(c) Employer or Board shall mean the Board of
Governors of Laurentian University, or its designate, as provided for in the Laurentian
University of Sudbury Act.
(d) Union or LUFA shall mean the Laurentian
University Faculty Association, certified to be the exclusive Bargaining Agent for the full- time and Sessional faculty of the
University pursuant to the various relevant decisions of the Ontario Labour Relations Board.
(e) Parties shall mean the Board of Governors of
Laurentian University of Sudbury and the
Laurentian University Faculty Association.
(f) Senate shall mean the Senate of Laurentian
University of Sudbury as constituted in the
Laurentian University of Sudbury Act.
(g) President shall mean the President of
Laurentian University of Sudbury or the
President's designate.
(h) Vice-President, Academic and Provost shall mean the Vice-President, Academic and
Provost of Laurentian University of Sudbury or his/her designate.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 10

Collective Agreement 2011-14
(i) Dean shall mean the Dean of a Faculty duly appointed or the Dean's designate.
(j) University Librarian shall mean the officer in charge of the University Library and Archives.
(k) Faculty shall mean anybody identified as such by the Senate of Laurentian University of
Sudbury, and with the approval of the
Employer in accordance with the Laurentian
University of Sudbury Act.
(l) Chair/Director shall mean the Chair/Director of any teaching department / professional school / library department.
(m) Member or Employee shall mean a Member of the Bargaining Unit for whom the Union is certified as the exclusive
bargaining agent except where the context requires otherwise.
(n) Full-time faculty Members shall mean academic Employees appointed through tenured, probationary, or limited-term
appointments to perform duties of (a)
Teaching, including supervision / Professional
Librarianship / Archives Management, (b)
Scholarly Activity, and (c) University
Governance and Administrative Duties consistent with Article 5.15 – Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of Academics.
(o) Unless specified in relevant Articles within the
Collective Agreement, the terms Professional
Librarians and professional librarianship shall mean Professional Librarians and Archivists, and professional librarianship
and archival management, respectively.
(p) Sessional Member shall mean a Member hitherto a Member of the Bargaining Unit designated by the March 28, 1994
Ontario
Labour Relations Board Certificate and now a
Member of this Merged Bargaining Unit.
(q) Adjunct faculty members shall mean those persons outside the university whose scholarly or professional
accomplishments merit association with the university. Adjunct faculty members are appointed for a defined
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 11

Collective Agreement 2011-14 period, with defined privileges and voluntary responsibilities in scholarly activity. Adjunct
appointments do not have ranks or carry the right to vote in Department/School decision- making.
(r) Academic Year shall mean the twelve (12) month period commencing July 1 and ending
June 30 of any given year and includes the
Fall, Winter, and Spring Terms as per the
University Calendar, even where the Spring
Term extends beyond June 30.
(s) Session shall mean either or both Terms of the Winter Session (from September to
December or from January to April) or the
Spring Session (from April to July) as per the
Laurentian University Academic Calendar posted on the Laurentian University website.
(t) Course credits shall mean the number of credits assigned to a course by the University
Senate and as indicated in the Laurentian
University Calendar.
(u) Course credits that contribute toward
Sessional Seniority shall mean credits arising from courses for which the Sessional
Lecturer’s name appears on the Laurentian
University course masters, grade reports, teaching evaluations, or letters of appointment and excludes courses offered by
the Centre for Continuing Education, except for non-distance education courses that are offered on a Laurentian campus.
(v) Immediate Family shall mean a spouse, sibling, parent or child whether related by blood, adoption, marriage or
common-law relationship.
(w) Conflict of interest shall mean a situation where an individual stands to benefit from a decision being made with
respect to a person who is a member of the individual’s immediate family, or with whom the individual has any relationship
of an intimate and/or financial and/or commercial nature either current or past, including any student- supervisor
relationship or any other past or present relationship, which conflicts or appears to conflict with the individual’s
responsibility to the University and includes an actual, apparent and/or perceived conflict of interest.
(x) Faculty Personnel Committee shall mean
FPC/FFPC/LPC
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 12

Collective Agreement 2011-14
ARTICLE 1.35 – COPIES
1.35.1 The Employer shall, within thirty (30) days after the respective bargaining committees have approved the
translation of the Collective Agreement, provide at no charge, one print copy of this Collective
Agreement in both official languages to each
Member of the Union, and upon request to individuals who were employed as Sessional
Lecturers during the previous three (3) years.
1.35.2 The Employer shall also issue, at no charge, a copy of the Collective Agreement to each new appointee, whose
appointment falls within the Bargaining Unit, no later than with the offer of appointment.
1.35.3 The cost of producing any additional copies shall be borne by the Party that requests them.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 13

Collective Agreement 2011-14
RELATIONS BETWEEN THE UNION AND THE EMPLOYER
ARTICLE 2.10 – RECOGNITION OF THE EMPLOYER
2.10.1 Composition
Laurentian University of Sudbury is incorporated under the Statutes of the Province of Ontario, 1960,
Chapter 151 as amended by 1961-62, Chapter 154.
2.10.2 Rights
The Union recognises that the Employer has retained and shall possess and exercise all rights and functions, powers,
privileges and authority that the
Employer possessed under the Act of Incorporation prior to the signing of this Collective Agreement with the Union,
excepting only those that are clearly and specifically relinquished or restricted in this Collective
Agreement, or modified by statute. The Employer undertakes that all rights and functions, powers, privileges and authority
shall be exercised in a manner consistent with the provisions of this
Collective Agreement.
ARTICLE 2.15 – RECOGNITION OF THE BARGAINING UNIT
2.15.1 The Employer recognises the Union as the exclusive
Bargaining Agent for the Bargaining Unit(s) defined in the Ontario Labour Relations Board Certificates of
July 9, 1979, March 28,1994, and October 31,1995
(which are attached as appendices to this
Memorandum of Agreement) and any amendments to these certificates.
ARTICLE 2.20 – EMPLOYMENT OF NON-MEMBERS
2.20.1 The Employer agrees that, except as otherwise provided for in this Article, it will not employ
Non-Members to teach in the programs of/or offer professional library service in the University.
Membership in the Bargaining Unit is defined in
Article 2.15 – Recognition of the Bargaining Unit.
2.20.2 Notwithstanding the generality of clause 2.20.1 above, nothing in this Collective Agreement is intended to prevent
the Employer from assigning a teaching load to individuals that are precluded from membership in the Bargaining Unit by
virtue of their position as described in the Ontario Labour Relations
Board Certificates designated in Article 2.15 –
Recognition of the Bargaining Unit. The Union will exercise reason in entering into Memoranda of
Agreement to allow the assignment of occasional teaching loads to qualified individuals who hold senior administrative
posts within the University and
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 14

Collective Agreement 2011-14 whose official functions could reasonably be deemed to be inconsistent with Union
Membership.
2.20.3 As per the Ontario Labour Relations Board
Certificate, Visiting and Exchange professors/librarians may work outside the
Bargaining Unit.
2.20.4 Notwithstanding clause 2.20.3 above, Non-Members of the Bargaining Unit must not participate in decisions by the
Department/School on personnel matters except as specified in this Collective
Agreement.
ARTICLE 2.25 – SENIOR ACADEMIC ADMINISTRATORS
2.25.1 Selection
While retaining the right to appoint Senior Academic
Administrators, including the President, the Employer recognises the usefulness and desirability of consultation with
Members, Units and Divisions in their selection, and shall follow the selection and appointment procedures that have been
approved by the Board of Governors and the Senate. In instances where an outside applicant is being considered for a
senior academic appointment, the applicant will normally be offered an appointment according to their qualifications at a
rank consistent with the criteria listed under Article 5.20 – Appointment and
Renewal.
2.25.2 Removal
The Employer shall consider all serious complaints against Senior Academic Administrators and take appropriate action,
including the possibility of removal from office. It is understood that if a majority of Members of the Bargaining Unit within
the
Administrator's purview indicate dissatisfaction with that Administrator, the University will view this as one example of a
serious complaint.
2.25.3 Re-entry into the Bargaining Unit
(a) Any Senior Academic Administrators, who are excluded from the Bargaining Unit by virtue of their office, shall upon
resignation/retirement/removal from that office or upon being made redundant or in the event of closure of the office return
to take-up
Membership in the Bargaining Unit.
(b) No Member shall be displaced from the
Department/School by the entry or re-entry of
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 15

Collective Agreement 2011-14 former Senior Academic Administrators. If there is no vacancy in the Department/School
concerned, the additional allocation shall not be at the expense of another
Department/School allocation.
(c) For all purposes relating to this Collective
Agreement, membership in the Bargaining
Unit of a Senior Academic Administrator shall be reckoned as if they had not been outside the Bargaining Unit during their
term of office.
(d) Senior Academic Administrators returning to the Bargaining Unit shall be considered as
Members teaching for the first time (as per paragraph 5.40.8 (d) of Article 5.40 –
Academic Workload) and shall be assigned teaching/professional library loads in keeping with the practice of their
respective
Department/School(s).
2.25.4 Acting or Substitute Senior Academic
Administrators
(a) The University may from time to time appoint members of the Bargaining Unit to act or substitute for short periods of
time in the place of Senior Academic Administrators.
Members so serving shall not undertake or be required to undertake any personnel action.
(b) For longer periods, i.e. two (2) months or more, when there is a need for an appointee to substitute or act with full
authority and responsibility of office, a Member who so acts shall cease to be a Member of the Bargaining
Unit for the period of substituting or acting and shall receive a pro-rated stipend for the position.
2.25.5 Relationship between Senior Academic
Administrators and Departments/Schools.
Senior Academic Administrators shall be considered full Members of Departments/Schools in which they teach/offer
professional library service, except that they must not participate in decisions by the
Department/School on personnel matters.
ARTICLE 2.30 – EXISTING PRACTICES
2.30.1 Prior to modifying or discontinuing any working conditions not covered by the Collective Agreement but possessed
by all Members of the Bargaining Unit or by a group thereof, the Employer agrees to give
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 16

Collective Agreement 2011-14 notice of such change or discontinuance to the
Union.
2.30.2 The Union shall be afforded the opportunity to make a representation to the Employer through the Joint
Consultative Committee for the Administration of the
Collective Agreement prior to the implementation of any change as defined in clause 2.30.1 above. After such
representation, the Employer has the right to proceed providing the change or discontinuance is urgent and reasonable.
ARTICLE 2.35 – MODIFICATIONS TO THE LEGAL STATUS
OF THE UNIVERSITY
2.35.1 Amendment to The Act
Any future proposals by the Employer to amend the
Laurentian University of Sudbury Act, 1960 shall be presented to the Legislative Assembly of the
Province of Ontario, after consultation with the Union.
2.35.2 Amalgamation, Consolidation, Merger or
Expansion of The University
(a) In the event of a merger or amalgamation or a transfer of jurisdiction, the provisions of the
Labour Relations Act, 1995 of Ontario shall apply, particularly sections 62 and 63.
(b) This Collective Agreement shall bind the transferees or assignees of the University or of the Union.
ARTICLE 2.40 – RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES OF THE UNION
2.40.1 (a) The Employer agrees to provide the Union with the use of a serviced office, in an academic area of the
University.
(b) The Employer agrees to provide to the Union room L-303 (not including L-305) as a common room for use by
Members, Senior
Administrators and their guests.
2.40.2 The Union shall have access to the internal postal service of the University. Normal practice of charging for
external mail will apply.
2.40.3 The Employer shall permit the Union to use
University premises as meeting rooms on the same basis as University organisations.
2.40.4 The Employer will allow the Union to use University printing, computer, and audio-visual facilities at the same rate
as University users, subject to availability.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 17

Collective Agreement 2011-14
2.40.5 The Employer agrees to continue to extend a monthly account, due when rendered, to which charges incurred by
the Union shall be debited.
2.40.6 The Union may request, prior to May 8 of the preceding academic year, that Members be relieved by the
appropriate Dean/University Librarian of up to twelve (12) credits of a teaching workload, or its equivalent in the case of
the Library, during the course of an academic year. Such requests shall not be unreasonably refused. In any one
academic year no more than thirty-six (36) credits of reductions will be granted in total.
If, on the recommendation of the Dean/University
Librarian concerned in consultation with the
Department/School, a replacement is required to take on the duties of which a Member has been relieved, the Union will
reimburse the Employer for a maximum of one (1) sessional payment for each six
(6) credit equivalent reduction that it has requested based on the rate of pay for Sessional Members without establishment
status as specified in Article
4.55 – Rates of Pay for Sessional Members.
If a replacement is not required, the Union will still reimburse the Employer for a maximum of one (1) sessional payment
for each six (6) credit equivalent reduction that it has requested based on the rate of pay for Sessional Members without
establishment status as specified in Article 4.55 – Rates of Pay for
Sessional Members and, in this case, the funds will be transferred by the Employer to the
Department(s)/School(s) affected by the workload reductions to be used by the Department/School as it deems
appropriate in accordance with generally accepted university policy.
Funds will be transferred by the Union to the
Employer within thirty (30) working days of being informed about the disposition of the funds. If the funds are to cover a
replacement, the name of the instructor, plus the course to be taught, or its equivalent in the case of the library, shall be
supplied to the Union.
2.40.7 The Union shall have the right at any time to call upon the assistance of representatives of the
Canadian Association of University Teachers and the
Ontario Confederation of University Faculty
Associations. Such representatives and any other duly designated representatives or counsel for the
Union shall have access to Laurentian University premises to consult with Members, Union officials or
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 18

Collective Agreement 2011-14 the Employer. These representatives designated by the Union shall participate in
discussions or negotiations with representatives of the Employer when their authority has been communicated to the
Employer by the Union.
2.40.8 The President of the Union, or someone designated by the President of the Union, and a second Member
designated by the President of the Union, shall continue to be non-voting members of the Board of
Governors.
2.40.9 The President of the Union, or someone designated by the President of the Union, shall continue to be a
non-voting member of the Finance Committee of the
Board of Governors.
2.40.10 The Employer agrees to continue current practices with respect to release time for Union activities provided these
practices are known and reasonable.
2.40.11 The Union shall maintain its current representation of one (1) member on the University Advisory
Committee on Security Services.
2.40.12 The President of the Union or someone designated by the President, and two (2) additional Members designated
by the President of the Union, shall continue to be voting members of the University
Pension Committee. Given the importance of pensions, on substantive matters, the Union’s
Board has the right to ratify the recommendations of its representatives.
ARTICLE 2.45 – DUES CHECK-OFF
2.45.1 No Member shall be required to join the Union as a condition of employment. Except as hereinafter specified, the
Employer shall deduct once monthly during the term of this Collective Agreement from the salary of each Member of the
Bargaining Unit monthly dues or other assessments for general
Union purposes uniformly and regularly payable by a
Member of the Union authorised in accordance with the Constitution and by-laws of the Union and certified in writing to
the Employer by the Union.
2.45.2 At the commencement of the Collective Agreement, the Union shall advise the Employer in writing of the amount of
its regular monthly membership dues.
Thereafter the Union shall advise the University in writing of any change in the amount of regular monthly membership
dues, such notice to be given at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of such change. The Union shall limit the
change in membership dues to no more than three (3) times
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 19

Collective Agreement 2011-14 per year.
2.45.3 Except as hereinafter specified, the amounts so deducted shall be remitted to the Union by the fifteenth (15th) of
the month following the month in which the deductions are made together with a list specifying the names of those
Members of the
Bargaining Unit from whose salaries the aforementioned deductions have been made and the individual amount of each
member's deduction. The
Employer shall with the list aforesaid provide the names of all Members who have ceased to be employees of the
University.
2.45.4 The Employer shall deduct from the salary of each
Member of the Bargaining Unit who obtains an order from the Ontario Labour Relations Board under section 47 of the
Labour Relations Act, 1995 of
Ontario (directing that the said Member is not required to pay monthly dues or other assessments to the Union because of
her/his religious conviction or belief) an amount equal to the monthly dues or other assessments for general Union
purposes uniformly and regularly payable by a Member of the
Union and shall remit said amount on behalf of the said Member to the University's Scholarship Funds.
2.45.5 In the event the Union wrongfully receives dues hereunder on account of an employee who is not a
Member of the Union, or if on account of a Member of the Union but in excess of the amount required, the Union agrees
to reimburse or credit the employee as the case may be for the amount so received. The
Union shall indemnify and save harmless the
University against any action arising out of the wrongful deductions of money for Union dues resulting from the Union's
instructions and the refusal of the Union to reimburse the employee, within sixty
(60) days of the lodging of her/his claim.
2.45.6 At the time that Income Tax T4 slips are provided to each Member by the University, the University shall indicate
on the T4 slips or separately in writing to each Member the deductions from her/his salary under this Article.
ARTICLE 2.50 – INFORMATION
2.50.1 The Parties recognise that their mutual goals stated in Article 1.20 – Purpose of the Collective Agreement can only
be realised if both Parties have access to necessary information required for effective collective bargaining and the proper
administration of this
Collective Agreement. Both Parties agree to use professional discretion in dealing with this information. This information
shall be provided in hard copy and, where feasible, electronically.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 20

Collective Agreement 2011-14
2.50.2 To that end the Employer undertakes to provide the
Union with the following, at the times indicated:
(a) In October and February of each year, an electronic and hard copy list of each full-time
Member of the Bargaining Unit which includes the name, gender, date of birth, language, department/school,
faculty/library, campus, rank (if applicable), actual salary, nominal salary, type of appointment (whether
tenured/permanent, probationary or limited term), date of appointment, end of appointment (where applicable), years of
service, highest degree, year of highest degree, date of appointment to current rank, and the type of current leave (if
applicable).
(b) In October, February, and May of each year, an electronic and hard copy list showing the name, salary, establishment
status, and courses taught that contribute to the
Sessional Seniority of each Member of the
Bargaining Unit who is employed during the current academic session.
(c) In October of each year an electronic and hard copy list of all limited term appointments and the reasons for the
appointment categorised according to paragraphs 5.20.10
(a) to (e) of Article 5.20 – Appointment and
Renewal.
(d) In October and February of each year, an electronic and hard copy list showing the name, and the number of credits
and courses, including distance education courses, taught by full-time members as part of their normal teaching load.
(e) In October, February and May of each year, an electronic and hard copy list showing the name, and number of credits
and distance education courses taught by sessional members and by full-time members in excess of their normal
teaching load.
(f) In October, February and May of each year an electronic and hard copy list showing the name, courses taught on
overload/professional library service rendered and amount of money paid to each full-time
Member of the Bargaining Unit during the current academic session.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 21

Collective Agreement 2011-14
(g) In October, February and May of each year an electronic and hard copy list showing the name, courses taught on
overload/professional library service rendered and amount of money paid to each non-member during the current
academic session.
(h) In October and February of each year an electronic and hard copy list including the names of all full-time Members
with course or workload release during the current academic year including the amount and reason for the release
granted.
(i) In October of each year a statement of the number of full-time Members of the
Bargaining Unit that did not expend all of the professional allowance available to them as provided in Article 6.45 –
Professional
Development Expenditures, and the total amount of funds left unexpended as of June
30 of the previous year.
(j) A copy of the letters of appointment of all new full-time Faculty Members who accept employment with the University
subsequent to the signing of this Collective Agreement by both Parties shall be supplied to the Union within fifteen (15)
days of receipt of the said executed letters of appointment.
(k) A copy of the letters of appointment of all
Sessional Lecturers who accept employment with the University subsequent to the ratification of this Collective
Agreement by both Parties. Such letters of appointment shall be supplied to the Union within fifteen (15) days of receipt of
said executed letters of appointment.
(l) A copy of the contracts issued to all full-time
Faculty Members who have been granted sabbatical leave or any other kind of leave.
Such contracts shall be supplied to the Union within fifteen (15) days after acceptance by the Member.
(m) A copy of patent and copyright contracts as per Article 6.30 – Patents and Article 6.35 –
Copyright.
(n) In October of each year, the total salary allocation and median salary for:
(i) Senior administration;
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 22

Collective Agreement 2011-14
(ii) Part-time employees outside the
Bargaining Unit by
Department/School;
(iii) Any other teaching or research employees outside the Bargaining
Unit;
(iv) Library employees outside the
Bargaining Unit.
(o) A copy of the course master and updates to the course master when they become available.
(p) A copy of the University's annual audited financial statements and supporting schedules, following approval of these
by the
Board of Governors.
(q) A copy of employment equity data including the number of women and men applying for each advertised position, the
gender, highest degree and years of experience for each applicant chosen for the interview list. Such information will be
forwarded to the Union by
September 30 of each year.
(r) A copy of advertisements for faculty positions shall be sent to the Union once they have been approved by the Office of
the Vice
President, Academic.
(s) A copy of any mailings forwarded by the
Employer to Members, to be sent to the
Union at the same time as the general mailing.
(t) A copy of all minutes, actuarial reports and benefit reports of the Pension and Benefits
Committees
(u) Thirty (30) days after the signing of this
Collective Agreement, a copy of all present articulation agreements between the
Employer and all public and private education institutions.
(v) A copy of all new articulation agreements between the Employer and all public and private education institutions within
thirty
(30) days of the signing of the said agreements.
2.50.3 The Union agrees to provide the Employer with:
(a) Copies of any statements or representations made or to be made publicly by the Union.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 23

Collective Agreement 2011-14
(b) An up-to-date copy of the constitution of the
Union.
(c) An up-to-date list of the Executive of the
Union.
2.50.4 Each Member, who has not previously done so, shall when requested supply the Personnel Office with one
(1) copy of her/his birth certificate (or other equivalent documentation attesting to the date of birth).
2.50.5 It is understood that this section shall not be construed to require either Party to supply any information that is
confidential with respect to matters relating to labour relations.
2.50.6 Each Party agrees to inform the other Party when statistical information concerning Members is released as
required by law or in response to a request from a government body or agency, and further, to inform the other Party of
the nature of the information requested or released. Except when required by law, the Employer agrees not to release any
individually identifiable statistical data in aggregate form concerning Members to any person, body, agency, and institution
without the written consent of the Union.
2.50.7 One (1) individual shall be chosen by each Party to coordinate the exchange of information and to act as liaison
between the two Parties.
2.50.8 Nothing in this Article is meant to preclude either side of this Collective Agreement from making reasonable
requests for additional information from time to time.
Both Parties agree to fulfil such requests.
ARTICLE 2.55 – CORRESPONDENCE
2.55.1 In conformity with section 113 of the Ontario Labour
Relations Act, 1995, except where otherwise expressly provided in this Collective Agreement, notices required to be given
under the provisions of this Collective Agreement shall be in writing and shall be sufficient either if addressed to the
appropriate recipient and sent by campus mail or Canada Post, or if delivered to the appropriate recipient personally with
a signed receipt required.
2.55.2 Notices to and official correspondence with the Union shall be addressed to the attention of the President of the
Union or the President of the Union's designate.
2.55.3 Notices to and official correspondence with the
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 24

Collective Agreement 2011-14
Employer shall be addressed to the Vice-President,
Academic and Provost.
ARTICLE 2.60 – JOINT CONSULTATIVE COMMITTEE FOR
THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE COLLECTIVE AGREEME
2.60.1 The President of the Union and the Vice-President,
Academic and Provost or their respective designates shall act as liaison between the two Parties as required by this
Collective Agreement as well as coordinate and exchange information as per Article
2.50 – Information.
2.60.2 When either Party deems it advisable, its representative may be accompanied by one (1) or more advisers.
2.60.3 The Parties are authorised from time to time to enter into Memoranda of Agreement with regard to the
Collective Agreement. The Parties may from time to time authorise other representatives, in addition to the
Vice-President, Academic and Provost and the
President of the Union, to sign these Memoranda of
Agreement.
2.60.4 The Parties agree to form a Joint Consultative
Committee for the Administration of the Collective
Agreement, composed of three (3) representatives of each Party as follows: the President of the Union and the
Vice-President, Academic and Provost or their respective designates; one (1) officer of LUFA and one (1) Dean appointed
by the Vice-President,
Academic and Provost; and one (1) appointee from each Party.
2.60.5 The Committee shall attempt:
(a) To maintain and develop a spirit of cooperation and mutual respect between the
Parties.
(b) To facilitate better working relationships between the Employer and the Union and its
Members.
(c) To discuss, review, and make recommendations to the Parties on matters of concern to either Party.
2.60.6 The Committee shall meet once in November and once in February and at other times when deemed useful or
necessary by mutual agreement of the
Parties.
2.60.7 The Committee shall be chaired in alternation by a representative of the Employer and a representative of the
Union. The chair shall be responsible for preparing and distributing the agendas and preparing minutes of meetings.
2.60.8 The Committee shall determine its own procedures
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 25

Collective Agreement 2011-14 subject to the provision that a quorum shall consist of at least two (2) representatives of
each Party.
2.60.9 The Committee shall not have the power to add to or to modify the terms of this Collective Agreement.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 26

Collective Agreement 2011-14
WORKING CONDITIONS
ARTICLE 3.10 – ACADEMIC FREEDOM
3.10.1 In addition to their legal rights as citizens, Members have the right to academic freedom. Academic freedom is the
right to search for truth, knowledge and understanding and to express freely what one believes. The University as an
institution and the community of its scholars have a duty to protect and defend the search for knowledge and truth by all
that enquire, teach, offer professional library service and learn under its auspices. They shall be free to carry out research
and to publish its results, free to teach, to discuss and to criticise both the University and the wider society it serves.
3.10.2 Academic freedom entails the obligation to base all research and teaching on a responsible search for truth and
knowledge. It requires the fulfillment of responsibilities to other members of the teaching and learning community. It
requires the acknowledgement of the work of others and the acceptance of responsibility for one's own beliefs and
utterances. Academic freedom does not confer legal immunity.
3.10.3 The principle and practice of collegial governance is essential for the exercise of academic freedom within the
University. Members are entitled to have representatives on and to participate in collegial governing bodies in accordance
with their role in the fulfillment of the University’s academic and educational mission.
3.10.4 The Parties agree to safeguard, as far as reasonably possible, the privacy of information, whether on paper or in
electronic form, that is exclusively personal to and/or in the possession of individual Members.
ARTICLE 3.15 – NO DISCRIMINATION, HARASSMENT OR
BULLYING
3.15.1 The Employer recognizes the need to provide an environment free from discrimination and harassment, including
bullying. To that end, the
Employer has established a Human Rights Office, headed by a Human Rights Advisor. The Union acknowledges the
Employer’s Policy on a
Respectful Workplace and Learning Environment.
This policy will be used by the Employer in dealing with all incidents of alleged discrimination, harassment, or bullying at
Laurentian University.
3.15.2 The Union shall observe and assist in the implementation of rules adopted to protect
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 27

Collective Agreement 2011-14 employees and the University Community against discrimination and harassment
(including bullying).
3.15.3 (a) The Parties agree that there shall be no discrimination, harassment, bullying, interference, restriction or
coercion exercised or practiced with respect to any Member in regard to salaries, rank, appointment, promotion, tenure,
reappointment, dismissal, leaves, benefits, or any other matter arising from this Collective Agreement, by reason of age
(except for retirement as provided for in this Collective Agreement or by legislation), race, language (except where the
lack of language competence would clearly prevent carrying out the required duties), creed, colour, ancestry, ethnic or
cultural background, national origin, political or religious affiliation or belief, sex, sexual orientation, marital status, family
relationship, personal or social life style or behaviour, clerical or lay status, disability (except where the physical, emotional
or mental condition would clearly prevent the carrying out of the required duties).
(b) The Parties agree, however, that no Members or person acting as an officer of the University shall take part in formal
discussions or vote with respect to the determination of any term or condition of employment of a member of her/his
immediate family as defined in Article
1.30 – Definitions.
3.15.4 The choice of the most competent person for the post as described in an advertisement formally approved by the
Vice-President, Academic and
Provost in consultation with the Department/School will not constitute discrimination.
3.15.5 In the case of the evaluation of applicants for appointment, renewal, tenure and promotion, the criteria adopted
must not systematically discriminate against members of designated groups and shall be periodically reviewed to ensure
that work done predominantly by members of designated groups is not undervalued.
3.15.6 There shall be no discrimination with respect to any
Member arising from membership or activity in the
Union, or from a failure to join or participate in the
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 28

Collective Agreement 2011-14
Union.
3.15.7 This Article shall not preclude any action that has as its object the equitable representation of designated
employment equity target groups throughout the academic community.
ARTICLE 3.20 – WORKING ENVIRONMENT
3.20.1 The Employer acknowledges its responsibility to provide and maintain facilities, services and general working
conditions, which support the effective discharge by full-time Members of their responsibilities as specified in Article 5.15 –
Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of Academics. The
Employer will determine by consideration of the financial resources of the University, the manner in which and the level at
which facilities and services are provided to Members. Additionally, the
Employer will provide, in a fair and equitable manner, at least a securable individual office for each full-time Member and
securable group offices for Sessional Members, ergonomically appropriate office furniture, appropriate lighting and
ventilation, and will maintain reasonable levels of working space, secretarial and other support services, including
telephones, computing, printing, duplicating, library services, technical services, teaching and research assistance and
laboratory space if required.
All moving expenses to relocate Members within the
University shall be paid by the Employer.
3.20.2 The Employer acknowledges the importance of providing well-designed, safe, and healthy physical working spaces
and of Members playing a substantive role in decisions affecting their working environment, particularly offices,
classrooms, studios, research and laboratory spaces. The
Employer shall establish a budget of thirty-five thousand dollars ($35,000) per year during the life of this Collective
Agreement for the provision of such furniture, work stations and equipment according to the recommendations of the
Working
Space Committee. The Working Space Committee shall consist of two (2) members selected by the
Union and two (2) members selected by the
Employer. For the purposes of this Article,
“furniture, work stations and equipment” shall be deemed to include, but not to be limited to, chairs, desks, computer
tables, lighting, foot rest, and such computer equipment as the keyboard, mouse, screen-glare guard, and wrist support
bar, all of a high standard.
3.20.3 All Members, including retirees, upon request, will be supplied with a photo identification library card at no
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 29

Collective Agreement 2011-14 cost to them except if they require a replacement for a lost card. The cards will receive a
renewal sticker yearly and be reissued only if necessary. The charge for replacement will be fifteen dollars ($15) per card.
3.20.4 In their offices and once every four (4) years,
Members shall be supplied with “a standard computer” as determined by the Computer Allocation
Committee, which shall be networked, attached to a network printer, and maintained without charge to the
Members and Departments/Schools for the full four
(4) years. The Computer Allocation Committee shall consist of two (2) members selected by the Union and two (2)
members selected by the Employer. The
Committee shall also review and update the plan for continued implementation of this policy, including the availability and
maintenance of computers for
Sessional Members, which shall be a minimum of one
(1) standard computer for every group office for
Sessional Members.
3.20.5 Full-time Members shall be offered a securable individual office located in reasonable proximity to the
Department’s/School’s main office. A Member’s office shall not be entered except by authorized
University staff.
3.20.6 All full-time Members teaching in the School of
Human Kinetics shall be granted free lockers outside the general area and membership service without fee. All Sessional
Members teaching activity courses and experientially based courses in the School of Human Kinetics shall be granted the
same privilege during the session(s) in which they are employed.
ARTICLE 3.25 – HEALTH, SAFETY AND SECURITY
3.25.1 The Employer recognises a responsibility to provide an environment intended to protect the health, safety and
security of employees as they carry out their responsibilities. To that end, the Parties agree that they are bound by the
Occupational Health and
Safety Act R.S.O 1990 as revised and in effect July
1, 2008. The Employer agrees to maintain a Joint
Health and Safety Committee, which will independently consider matters concerning the health and safety of employees
and students. This
Committee shall include two (2) representatives of all unionized groups in the University (including
LUFA), as well as one (1) representative of the
Science/Engineering Safety Committee and one (1)
Employer representative with power to co-opt other members.
The Committee's work will include an examination
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 30

Collective Agreement 2011-14 of procedures and physical facilities brought to its attention, as these relate to health,
safety and security.
3.25.2 The Union shall observe and assist in the implementation of rules adopted to protect the health and safety of
employees and to maintain the security of persons and premises.
3.25.3 Members who have reason to believe that a work situation is likely to endanger them have the right to refuse
unsafe work pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of the Ontario Occupational
Health and Safety Act.
ARTICLE 3.30 – BILINGUALISM
3.30.1 The University is committed to the fulfillment of its role as bilingual institution of higher learning, in accordance with
the Laurentian University of
Sudbury Act. The Employer and the Union pledge themselves to the maintenance and promotion of both official
languages, French and English, as well as both cultures.
Notwithstanding the above, the Employer and the
Union acknowledge the distinct role and the important contribution of Aboriginal languages and cultures in particular
programs at Laurentian
University. Further, the Employer and the Union recognize that in the University as a whole
Aboriginal faculty are underrepresented and agree as per Article 5.30 – Aboriginal Equity Initiative to establish an
Aboriginal equity initiative, and to waive the requirement for French/English bilingualism and recognize as bilingualism the
knowledge and/or demonstrated study of an Aboriginal language and one (1) of the two (2) official languages of
Laurentian University.
3.30.2 In accordance with the commitment stated in clause
3.30.1 above, the Employer recognizes the right of all Members to communicate directly (verbally and in writing) in the
official language of their choice with all University Departments, Schools, Research and
Administrative services for all official transactions.
3.30.3 The two Parties shall have the right to be heard in either official language and to require the translation of any
official materials. Members have the right to express themselves in the official language of their choice.
3.30.4 The two Parties agree to make every effort to provide a translation of non-official documents where either Party
requires such.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 31

Collective Agreement 2011-14
3.30.5 (a) A Joint Committee of two (2) representatives chosen by the Employer and two (2) representatives chosen by
the Union, distributed equitably between the two (2) official languages, shall prepare the guidelines and requirements for
competency required to enable each Member to meet the bilingualism requirements stated in her/his
Letter of Appointment, in accordance with clause 5.20.8 of Article 5.20 – Appointment and Renewal. The
recommendations of the
Joint Committee shall be approved by the
Employer and the Union. The Joint
Committee shall convene before January 1,
2009 and present its recommendations before July 1, 2009.
(b) The Employer agrees to provide language training at no cost in the course of the entire year at beginner, intermediate
and advanced levels in order to enable Members to a) meet the requirements of bilingualism stated in their Letter of
Appointment in accordance with clause 5.20.8 of Article 5.20 –
Appointment and Renewal and b) maintain and improve their skills.
(c) The Employer shall inform all new Members about language requirements for both official languages on an annual
basis until tenure is granted, in order to allow Members to prepare themselves adequately to meet the language
requirements for the granting of tenure.
3.30.6 A Member’s course syllabuses, course notes and presentations (regardless of their format), whether distributed,
projected or transmitted in any and all media, shall be written in the course’s language of instruction. The Member shall
ensure that a terminology index is available to students if certain required readings are not in the language of instruction.
ARTICLE 3.35 – CONFLICT OF INTEREST
3.35.1 No individual shall knowingly participate in any academic or administrative decision, including decisions regarding
commercial contracts or transactions, that benefits the individual, affects or benefits a person from whom the individual
stands to derive a financial benefit or affects or benefits a person in a situation as defined in Article 1.30 –
Definitions.
3.35.2 In the event the affected individual determines that a conflict exists of sufficient seriousness to compromise the
integrity of the decision-making
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 32

Collective Agreement 2011-14 process, the affected individual shall declare the nature and extent of the interest as soon
as possible and no later than the meeting(s) at which the matter is to be considered and the individual in conflict shall:
(a) withdraw from the meeting where the matter is being discussed;
(b) refrain from taking part in any other discussion of the matter; and
(c) refrain from voting on the matter.
In the event there is a disagreement as to whether a conflict of interest exists, the Vice-President,
Academic and Provost or her/his designate will decide the matter and the remedy will follow, accordingly. Decisions of the
Vice-President,
Academic and Provost or her/his designate can be challenged through the grievance procedure.
3.35.3 The term “individual” in this Article includes Members of the Bargaining Unit and management representatives.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 33

Collective Agreement 2011-14
SESSIONAL MEMBERS
ARTICLE 4.10 – APPOINTMENT PROVISIONS FOR
SESSIONAL MEMBERS
4.10.1 The Parties recognise that the University's mission is best served by a largely full-time faculty and that it is not
generally desirable to make sessional appointments a substitute for full-time faculty.
4.10.2 At the same time, the Parties recognise that sessional faculty add a significant level of diversity, expertise and
practical experience to the University, and their value must be recognised in the governance and decision-making
processes and generally in the on-going life of the University.
4.10.3 Teaching/professional librarianship duties comprise the only assigned function for Sessional Lecturers.
ARTICLE 4.15 – APPOINTMENT AND RENEWAL FOR
SESSIONAL MEMBERS
Appointment of Sessional Members of the Bargaining Unit
4.15.1 Appointments of Sessional Lecturers are made by the Vice-President Academic and Provost or her/his designate
on behalf of the Employer and on the recommendation of the Dean/University Librarian and the Department/School
concerned. The recommendation may be made by the
Department/School as a whole, or by a committee consisting of no fewer than three (3) Members.
4.15.2 Sessional appointments and other extra-departmental assignments of courses shall be made from rosters of
names of potential instructors maintained by the Departments/Schools responsible for the particular course. This will
enable appointments to be made expeditiously and at the same time in a way that honours Sessional
Members' seniority and other rights.
4.15.3 Sessional Members on the University roster shall be notified of the courses expected to be offered in their
Department(s)/School(s) in all sessions of the upcoming year. This shall be done by April 15.
Such notice must specify clearly the course, courses, or type of course to which it applies.
Sessional Members interested in teaching any of the available courses shall send a letter of application to the
Chair/Director of the
Department/School by May 15.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 34

Collective Agreement 2011-14
4.15.4 A letter of application, a current curriculum vitae, a current teaching dossier and any relevant supporting
documentation shall be filed with the
Department/School by the above dates. Notice may be given simply to bring forward a letter of application from previous
sessions, but curriculum vitae and teaching dossiers must be kept up to date.
4.15.5 Sessional Members may have their names added to the rosters after the above dates. In such cases seniority and
other rights shall not be enforceable.
4.15.6 Departments/Schools shall not be precluded from advertising or otherwise soliciting applications to their rosters,
either before or after the above dates.
4.15.7 When courses cannot be made part of full-time
Members’ normal teaching loads they shall be offered by the Department/School in the form of overload appointments or
sessional contracts.
Full-time Members, previous and current Sessional
Members, Retirees, and other qualified applicants may apply for these contracts. In awarding them, the Chair/Director of
the Department/School, in consultation with the appropriate Dean/University
Librarian shall follow the criteria for establishment and seniority listed in clauses 4.15.12 to 4.15.21 below, and for
overloads in paragraph 5.40.6 (b) of
Article 5.40 – Academic Workload.
4.15.8 During October of each year the Employer will circulate to all Departments/Schools, the Union and the Library a list
of courses taught on an overload basis by full-time Members of faculty or by
Sessional Members during the two (2) previous academic years. The list will also be posted on the
Laurentian University Human Resources website.
Departments/Schools will be requested to post these lists on their respective websites. All courses listed will be deemed
to have been posted.
4.15.9 When a Sessional appointment will be required for any other course, an advertisement shall be posted on a bulletin
board by the Department/School with a copy sent to the Union. The list will also be posted on the Laurentian University
Human Resources website and the Department/School website. The rosters shall remain open until ten (10) working days
after the posting on the bulletin board by the
Department/School. Any outstanding course may be advertised locally.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 35

Collective Agreement 2011-14
4.15.10 Full-time Members wishing to teach courses for which Departments/Schools other than their own are responsible
shall be governed by the same procedures and dates as Sessional Members.
Article 5.40 – Academic Workload and Article 8.35 –
Overloads also govern such assignments.
4.15.11 In exceptional circumstances where appointments must be made shortly before, or even after, the
commencement of instruction, and where time does not allow full compliance with the above procedures
(e.g., in cases of illness of a Member originally scheduled to teach; opening of a new section of a course(s); unanticipated
commencements of
Leaves of Absence, etc.) the ten (10) day period referred to above shall be waived, but the Employer undertakes that
reasonable efforts will be made not to violate the appointment rights and seniority protection of Members intended by the
foregoing.
The Employer shall inform the Union of each appointment made under this clause and the circumstances thereof
forthwith. Any individual so appointed shall provide a letter of application and a current curriculum vitae.
Establishment of Sessional Members
4.15.12 Sessional Members shall be deemed to have
Establishment status with respect of a particular course once they have been appointed to teach it for their third (3rd)
academic year. Such sessional contracts need not be in consecutive academic years, but in no case shall exceed the
previous six
(6) academic years.
4.15.13 Retirees shall be deemed to have Establishment status with respect to a particular course either when they have
taught a course for the third (3rd) year on sessional contracts or when they have taught a course as part of their regular
workload twice and have been hired at least once to teach a course on a sessional contract. Such sessional contracts or
teaching need not be in consecutive academic years, but in no case shall exceed the previous six (6) academic years.
4.15.14 The names of Established Sessional Lecturers shall be printed in the departmental faculty listings of the next
edition of the Laurentian University Calendar following a year in which an appointment is held.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 36

Collective Agreement 2011-14
Seniority of Sessional Members
4.15.15 A Sessional Member shall accrue seniority credits with respect to a particular course. For the purposes of this
Article, a distinction is made between courses offered in English and in French, and seniority credits shall accrue
separately for each language version of what would otherwise be considered the same course. Where a course is
replaced by a renamed, renumbered, or revised version of what is essentially the same course, or is replaced by a course
that performs the same function in the Department's/School’s curriculum, seniority status shall apply to such a new
course.
4.15.16 Sessional Members shall accrue seniority credit each time they teach a course. Members teaching a particular
course more than once in an academic year, shall accrue seniority credit each time they teach the course. This shall
include one (1) term courses and shall include the spring session or other extra sessions of that academic year.
4.15.17 Sessional Members with Establishment and with highest seniority shall have first right of reappointment, subject
to notice of those rights with respect to a particular term, as specified above.
Seniority entitlement shall, during the Fall, Winter, and Spring sessions, be limited to one section per term for each course
in which a Member holds seniority. (Such rights are also governed by limitations described in clause 4.25.3 of Article 4.25
– Workload Provisions for Sessional Members.)
4.15.18 Years of Seniority shall be the number of years in which a Member qualifies for seniority dated back to
1984. The onus shall be on the Member to establish her/his years of seniority prior to the above roster dates pertinent to
the relevant session.
Evidence might include, but is not limited to, any of the following in which clear identification is made: letters of
appointment, pay records, University and
Continuing Education calendars, course evaluations, grade sheets, administrative letters referring to the course. When
requested, the
Dean/University Librarian with authority for the course in question shall issue a written statement agreeing to reasonably
established seniority claims.
4.15.19 Seniority shall be retained during academic years in which a Sessional Lecturer is not offered reappointment, but
shall not be increased during those academic years. Seniority shall not however be able to be exercised if the Sessional
Lecturer has not been offered reappointment over three (3) consecutive academic years.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 37

Collective Agreement 2011-14
4.15.20 However, Seniority shall not be exercised if a
Sessional Lecturer has removed her/his name from a roster, or has declined an offer of appointment, for a second (2nd)
consecutive academic year.
4.15.21 Notwithstanding the foregoing, Sessional Lecturers may request leave from a roster for up to two (2) consecutive
years for parenting, adoption, full or part-time graduate studies or as per Article 7.40 –
Leaves of Absence Without Pay. Such application shall be made on a one (1) year-at-a-time basis and shall not be
unreasonably refused. In such cases seniority shall accrue in respect of the years of leave.
Written Offer of Appointment of Sessional Members
4.15.22 The Parties agree that Offers of Appointment shall be sent to Sessional Lecturers as soon as possible before
classes commence. Except for situations covered by clause 4.15.11 above, the Employer shall endeavour to mail Offers
of Appointment by the following dates: July 15 for the Fall Term,
November 15 for the Winter Term, and March 15 for the Spring Term.
Each Offer of Appointment shall specify the course number(s), the number of credits, terms and conditions of employment
including salary, benefits, sessional seniority, and cancellation conditions if applicable.
4.15.23 A copy of the current Collective Agreement shall be sent with any offer of employment, except where the
applicant would already have received a copy.
4.15.24 A copy of each accepted Offer of Appointment shall be sent to the Union forthwith.
Grievance of Appointment Decision of Sessional Members
4.15.25 In the event that an unsuccessful applicant for a sessional teaching position believes that someone else was
appointed to the position in violation of the provisions of this Collective Agreement, she/he may request within one (1)
month of the decision a review of the appointment with the view of establishing whether the Employer acted in accordance
with the provisions of this Collective
Agreement when not appointing the unsuccessful applicant.
4.15.26 Such a request for review shall be directed to the
Dean/University Librarian and/or the Union and shall involve initially an informal stage in which the
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 38

Collective Agreement 2011-14
Dean/University Librarian and a Grievance Officer appointed by the Union have an opportunity to review the available
information. If agreement cannot be reached at the informal stage, the matter shall be dealt with according to the
grievance procedures set out in Article 11.10 – Grievance
Procedure.
ARTICLE 4.20 – PERMANENT APPOINTMENTS FOR
SESSIONAL MEMBERS
4.20.1 Definition: A Permanent Sessional Lecturer with a continuing appointment who is responsible for undergraduate
teaching / clinical education or supervision / language teaching / skills teaching / coaching / writing assistance and other
related duties as determined by the Employer. Nothing in this definition precludes the Employer from working with the
Boards of the three (3) federated universities to create such a position funded jointly by the partners.
4.20.2 Qualifications: At least a Master’s degree or appropriate professional qualifications and with proven competence in
teaching.
4.20.3 Appointments: Any new Permanent Sessional
Lecturer position must be advertised internally before being advertised externally and must go through the normal hiring
process for the appointment of full-time Members. Sessional
Members with Establishment in at least twelve (12) credits or four (4) three (3) credit courses shall have first consideration
for appointment as Permanent
Sessional Lecturer.
In the event there is no qualified internal applicant as determined by the Department/School, the
University may advertise externally. A Member appointed to a Permanent Sessional Lecturer position without
establishment in at least twelve (12) credits at Laurentian University shall have a probationary status of three (3) years.
The evaluation of an applicant on probation shall follow the normal assessment process for full-time
Members as set out in Article 5.50 – Assessment of a Member’s Performance, but shall be restricted to the teaching
responsibilities.
4.20.4 Workload: The normal maximum teaching workload is twenty-four (24) credits of which a maximum of nine (9) may
be assigned in the Spring Session.
There are no obligations or expectations with respect to research or service but nothing preludes a Permanent Sessional
Lecturer from participating in either activity voluntarily.
4.20.5 Transfer to Regular Faculty Ranks: A Permanent
Sessional Lecturer may be appointed to a regular
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 39

Collective Agreement 2011-14 faculty position without advertising under the following conditions:
(a) The Vice President, Academic and Provost has authorized a position for the
Department/School.
(b) The Chair/Director of the Department/School has made available an application file for viewing by all Members of the
Department/School and has arranged interviews and open meetings with the candidate and Members in the
Department/School, on campus or through telecommunications technology.
(c) A majority of the full-time Members of the
Department/School by vote have approved of the recommendation, including the term of the appointment where
applicable
4.20.6 The salary of each Permanent Sessional Lecturer on July 1 shall be composed of the base salary of each Member
as of June 30 of that year as modified by the following items:
(a) A scale increase as set in paragraph 8.10.1
(a) of Article 8.10 – Salary Structure for the respective year;
(b) A Progress-Through-The-Ranks increment as set in paragraph 8.10.1 (b) of Article 8.10
– Salary Structure for the respective year;
(c) A merit award shall be awarded according to
Article 8.25 – Merit Increments;
(d) On July 1, 2011 an increase of $2,000 to the member’s regular salary.
The salary structure for 2011-12, 2012-13 and
2013-14 shall be the floor of Lecturer/General
Librarian as set in Article 8.10 – Salary Structure for the respective year.
4.20.7 Starting Salary and Benefits: Based on qualifications and university teaching experience, starting at the floor of
Lecturer and with increments as set out in Article 8.10 – Salary Structure, plus all regular benefits as per Article 8.45 –
Benefits, vacation as per Article 7.15 – Vacation and working conditions as per Article 3.20 – Working Conditions.
The starting salary of an applicant with previous teaching experience shall be based on one (1) increment for each year of
full-time equivalent at the university level previously taught. The position shall not contain ranks or promotion. Permanent
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 40

Collective Agreement 2011-14
Sessional Lecturer shall be entitled to the professional development allowance as per Article
6.45 – Professional Development Expenditures.
4.20.8 Article 3.10 – Academic Freedom, Article 5.75 –
Disciplinary Measures, except clause 5.75.7, and
Article 5.80 – Dismissal Procedures shall apply to
Permanent Sessional Lecturers.
4.20.9 Should a Permanent Sessional Lecturer be declared redundant the Member will be entitled to severance pay equal
to one (1) month of salary for each year of service, with a minimum of three (3) months and up to a maximum of eighteen
(18) months.
4.20.10 The University may appoint a maximum of thirty
(30) Permanent Sessional Lecturers.
4.20.11 Financial Exigency: Article 10.15 – Financial
Exigency shall apply to Permanent Sessional
Lecturers. Within a Department/School, a
Permanent Sessional Lecturer shall not be terminated in preference to a non-tenured Member.
When there are more than one Permanent Sessional
Lecturers in a Department/School, the more senior
Member, in terms of service determined from the date at which permanency at the University became effective shall be
retained unless, after applying the criteria in Article 10.15 – Financial Exigency, there is a clear and substantial reason for
doing otherwise.
ARTICLE 4.25 – WORKLOAD PROVISIONS FOR
SESSIONAL MEMBERS
4.25.1 (a) If, once a contract has been executed, the workload of a Sessional Lecturer must be altered, the agreement of
the Member must be obtained.
(b) Once a contract has been executed with a
Sessional Lecturer, such a contract shall not be cancelled in order to have the duties performed by a Faculty Member with
a full- time appointment.
(c) Cancellation prior to its commencement of a course for which a contract with a Sessional
Lecturer has been executed can occur only in accordance with cancellation clause provisions contained in the contract.
(d) Cancellation clauses shall be used only where there is good reason to believe that enrolment levels may be
vulnerable. In the
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 41

Collective Agreement 2011-14 event of a cancellation the Employer shall:
(i) Attempt to find work of equivalent value for which the Sessional Member is qualified; and failing this
(ii) Shall pay a cancellation fee of fifteen percent (15%) of the agreed salary as outlined in the Letter of Appointment for
courses taught during the Fall and
Winter Terms; or
(iii) Shall pay a fixed amount of two hundred and fifty dollars ($250) per three (3) credit course, to be stated in the Letter of
Appointment, for courses taught during the Spring Session.
Sessional Lecturers shall accrue Sessional
Seniority for all cancelled courses once they have achieved establishment. Cancelled courses shall not count toward
establishment.
4.25.2 The contracts issued to Sessional Librarians shall identify in reasonable detail the hours during which the work is to
be performed. These hours cannot be changed without the consent of the Member. The librarian pay equivalent shall be
deemed to be (___) hours per course credit of pay (the figure used here to be agreed by the Parties prior to any use of
this provision).
4.25.3 The workload of a Sessional Member shall normally not exceed twelve (12) credits per Fall/Winter session
(September to April) and nine (9) credits per
Spring session (May to August). The credits taught by
Sessional Members in off-campus courses shall not be included in these totals.
ARTICLE 4.30 – TEACHING RIGHTS AND
RESPONSIBILITIES FOR SESSIONAL MEMBERS
4.30.1 Sessional Lecturers shall be covered by the general provisions regarding teaching and professional librarianship in
clauses 5.15.5 to 5.15.18 of Article
5.15 – Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of
Academics except for specific clauses within this section that clearly apply only to full-time faculty.
4.30.2 The Chair/Director of the Department/School shall structure the procedures required by this
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 42

Collective Agreement 2011-14 responsibility in a reasonable manner.
4.30.3 The Chair/Director of the Department/School shall make procedures regarding Sessional Members a matter of
record.
4.30.4 In all cases where a personnel action affecting
Sessional Members is required, the action shall be an action of the full Department/School Council, even where general
supervision is delegated to the
Chair/Director, to a coordinator, or to a committee.
4.30.5 Sessional Members shall have the right to attend
Departmental/School meetings. In terms of voting rights, Sessional Members shall have the right of up to two (2) voting
representatives as elected annually by the Sessional Members teaching in the respective Department/School. The
number of sessional voting representatives shall be determined by the number of full-time Members in the
Department/School as follows:
One (1) to Nine (9): One (1) Sessional voting representative
Ten (10) and over: Two (2) Sessional voting representatives
4.30.6 The Dean/University Librarian shall make copies of course evaluations of Sessional Members available to the
Members of the Department/School responsible for the appointment or renewal of
Sessional Members. Student course evaluations shall not be the sole means of determining the quality of the Sessional
Member’s teaching performance.
The Sessional Member’s entire teaching dossier shall be considered.
ARTICLE 4.35 – ANNUAL REPORT FOR SESSIONAL
MEMBERS
4.35.1 Sessional Members shall submit brief annual reports in electronic and paper format to their
Departments/Schools. These reports shall include a current curriculum vitae as well as a current teaching dossier as
defined in Article 5.50 – Assessment of a
Member’s Performance. At their discretion,
Sessional Members may also include material related to their scholarly or creativity activity, professional development,
university governance, outside professional activities, and service to the community.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 43

Collective Agreement 2011-14
4.35.2 Departments/Schools shall make copies of these reports available to the Dean/University Librarian on request.
ARTICLE 4.40 – WITHDRAWAL OF SENIORITY FOR
SESSIONAL MEMBERS
4.40.1 The rights established by the provisions for seniority as described above may be altered or revoked in the event
that the teaching performance of a Sessional
Member is found to be unsatisfactory. Action that may affect the seniority rights of a Sessional Member may be initiated at
the request of the Chair/Director of the Department/School or the Dean/University
Librarian and will normally occur only after an informal investigation establishes reasonable grounds for a formal
procedure. There is an expectation that the Sessional Member will be made aware during the informal stage of an
investigation of the concerns regarding her/his teaching performance and will be given an opportunity to give reasons why
a formal procedure should not be initiated. The
Member will be advised of her/his right to Union representation.
4.40.2 If, after an informal investigation, the Chair/Director of the Department/School and the Dean/University
Librarian are of the view that a formal procedure is warranted, an investigation shall be conducted by the
Departmental/School Council or a specially formed committee that reports back to the Council. The
Union shall be advised that this procedure will be invoked. Department/Schools shall have reasonable flexibility in the
constitution of such a committee. In all cases the investigating body must have at least four (4) members who shall attend
all meetings convened. Membership shall include the
Chair/Director of the Department/School, at least one
(1) other full-time Member of the Department/School, at least one (1) Sessional Member from the
Department/School (if there is one willing to serve), and a nominee of the Sessional Member under investigation (such
nominee must be a full-time or
Sessional Member teaching in the
Department/School during the current academic year).
4.40.3 The Member under investigation shall have the right to a full and reasonable statement of the
Department's/School’s reasons for initiating the investigation. The Member shall have the right to examine all evidence
under consideration at least ten
(10) working days before any final determination is made and make counter-representation on it in writing or in person or
both. The Member shall have the right to be accompanied by a colleague.
4.40.4 The investigating committee shall present its findings to the Department/School Council stating the
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 44

Collective Agreement 2011-14 reasons for its conclusions in reasonable detail. The decision of the Council, which may
differ from that of the Committee, shall be forwarded to the
Dean/University Librarian for action.
4.40.5 The Council's determination may request that the
Member be cautioned or that the Employer's seniority obligation to the Sessional Member be revoked or that the Member
be placed on probation for the duration of one (1) course and that a further determination be made at the conclusion of
that course.
4.40.6 The Dean/University Librarian may accept the recommendation, reject it, or refer it back to the
Department/School for further consideration.
4.40.7 If the Dean/University Librarian decides on revocation of seniority rights, she/he shall advise the
Member and the Union in writing, stating reasons.
The Member shall have the right to request an appeal within ten (10) working days of the receipt of that communication.
The appeal shall be heard by a special FPC/FFPC, which shall consist of the regular
FPC/FFPC, augmented by one (1) Sessional
Lecturer nominated by the Union who will not vote.
The Sessional Lecturer shall have the right to be heard, to be accompanied by a colleague, to examine any evidence with
at least ten (10) days notice and to present counter-representation on it.
The appeal body shall determine the case by simple majority. No further arbitration or appeal shall be open to the Member
or the Employer.
4.40.8 Where an appeal is determined in favour of a
Sessional Member, and where the course has been, or comes to be, scheduled for the following academic year, the
Sessional Member, subject to seniority, shall be assigned to, and paid for such a course or courses. Any other Sessional
Member assigned in anticipation of a determination against a Sessional
Member against whom withdrawal of seniority is anticipated shall be entitled to compensation.
4.40.9 Withdrawal of Seniority actions must first be initiated
(as per clause 4.40.1 above) by June 1 in order to be effective for the subsequent academic year.
ARTICLE 4.45 – PHYSICAL AND MENTAL ILLNESS FOR
SESSIONAL MEMBERS
4.45.1 In the event of illness, a Sessional Lecturer shall be granted leave with full pay up to two (2) weeks in each term. If
requested, the Sessional Lecturer shall provide a medical certificate to substantiate the
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 45

Collective Agreement 2011-14 claim. For longer illnesses no deduction of pay shall be made in cases where no substitute
teaching costs accrue to the Employer.
ARTICLE 4.50 – FAMILY RESPONSIBILITY FOR SESSIONAL
MEMBERS
4.50.1 The Ontario Employment Standards Act, 2000 provides specific rights and responsibilities with respect to leaves
related to family responsibilities.
These provisions will apply to Sessional Lecturers.
ARTICLE 4.55 – RATES OF PAY FOR SESSIONAL
MEMBERS
4.55.1 Sessional Lecturers shall be paid as follows for each three (3) credit course which commences after the date
shown below; other courses will be pro- rated as per their credit weighting.
(a) Sessional Members without Establishment
Four Four percent percent
Total rate
Base pay (4%) in (4%) in of pay lieu of lieu of vacation benefits
July 1,
2011 $5,993 $240 $240 $6,473
July 1,
2012 $6,112 $244 $244 $6,600
July 1,
2013 $6,235 $249 $249 $6,733
(b) Sessional Members with Establishment and
Retirees
Four Four percent percent
Total rate
Base pay (4%) in (4%) in of pay lieu of lieu of vacation benefits
July 1,
2011 $6,292 $252 $252 $6,796
July 1,
2012 $6418 $257 $257 $6,932
July 1,
2013 $6,547 $262 $262 $7,071
Sessional Members are also entitled to the assignment of teaching assistants and/or markers at a level consistent with
assignment of such assistance to full-time Members.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 46

Collective Agreement 2011-14
4.55.2 When scheduled Continuing Education Courses may otherwise have to be cancelled, Members may, if they
choose, agree to teach a course for an amount less than the overload stipend. This amount shall be equal to at least the
stipend for the course divided by twelve (12) and multiplied by the number of students enrolled in the course at the time
the course starts. A copy of the agreement shall be sent to the Union at the same time as it is offered to the Member.
4.55.3 The Parties agree that Sessional Members who have establishment for one (1) course, according to Article
4.15 – Appointment and Renewal for Sessional
Members, shall be paid at the establishment rate for any other course they may teach. However, such pay does not
confer establishment for that particular course.
4.55.4 The Parties agree that compensation for Sessional
Members teaching a “teachable” course in the
School of Education or a "didactique" course at l’École des sciences de l’éducation shall be pro-rated at six hundred and
twelve dollars ($612) per student up to the maximum of the rate of pay for a Sessional
Member with establishment for such a course.
4.55.5 The Parties agree that the rates of pay for Sessional
Members teaching activity courses in the School of
Human Kinetics shall be the following:
(a) Sessional Members teaching activity courses in the School of Human Kinetics without Establishment
Four Four percent percent
Total rate
Base pay (4%) in (4%) in of pay lieu of lieu of vacation benefits
July 1,
2011 $3,366 $135 $135 $3,636
July 1,
2012 $3,433 $137 $137 $3,707
July 1,
2013 $3,502 $140 $140 $3,782
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 47

Collective Agreement 2011-14
(b) Sessional Members teaching activity courses in the School of Human Kinetics with Establishment
Four Four percent percent
Total rate
Base pay (4%) in (4%) in of pay lieu of lieu of vacation benefits
July 1,
2011 $3,570 $143 $143 $3,856
July 1,
2012 $3,641 $146 $146 $3,933
July 1,
2013 $3,714 $149 $149 $4,012
4.55.6 The Parties agree that the rates of pay for Sessional
Members teaching Applied Music courses shall be the following:
(a) Sessional Members teaching Applied Music courses without Establishment
Four Four
Total percent percent
Hourly hourly
(4%) in (4%) in base rate rate of lieu of lieu of pay vacation benefits
July 1,
2011 $58.92 $2.36 $2.36 $63.64
July 1,
2012 $60.10 $2.40 $2.40 $64.90
July 1,
2013 $61.30 $2.45 $2.45 $66.20
(b) Sessional Members teaching Applied Music courses with Establishment
Four Four
Total percent percent
Hourly hourly
(4%) in (4%) in base rate rate of lieu of lieu of pay vacation benefits
July 1,
2011 $62.13 $2.49 $2.49 $67.11
July 1,
2012 $63.37 $2.53 $2.53 $68.43
July 1,
2013 $64.64 $2.59 $2.59 $69.82
(c) The above rates shall apply to Sessional
Members assigned the duties of sitting on music juries, supervising master classes, and directing ensembles.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 48

Collective Agreement 2011-14
Establishment:
On the appointment of a Sessional Member to teach an Applied Music course for a third (3rd) year, the Member shall
have establishment as per Article
4.15 – Appointment and Renewal for Sessional
Members.
Remuneration for Ensemble Directors:
For large ensembles of Laurentian University
(Laurentian University Choir and Laurentian
University Symphonic Wind Ensemble), the total pay will be calculated at three (3) hours per week for twenty-four (24)
weeks based on the above hourly rates.
For all other ensembles, the total pay will be calculated at two (2) hours per week for twenty-four
(24) weeks based on the above hourly rates.
ARTICLE 4.60 – PHYSICAL EDUCATION FACILITIES FOR
SESSIONAL MEMBERS
4.60.1 Sessional Members and their spouse and dependants as defined for full-time Members are eligible for Physical
Education Centre membership and lockerette for the academic year in which they are employed, subject to the payment
of the annual service fee and lockerette rental fee as established by the Division of Physical Education.
ARTICLE 4.65 – EXEMPTION FROM TUITION FEES FOR
SESSIONAL MEMBERS
4.65.1 Sessional Lecturers shall be entitled to exemption from tuition fees for credit courses taken at
Laurentian University. The exemption available shall equal the number of credits taught by the Sessional
Member. The earned exemption can be carried for a maximum of five (5) years from the time the course was taught.
Sessional members may transfer to their spouse or dependents up to six (6) credits of the current year’s exemption
credits to be used within that academic year.
ARTICLE 4.70 – PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
EXPENDITURES FOR SESSIONAL MEMBERS
4.70.1 In order to further the objectives of the University, the creation and dissemination of knowledge, the activities of
each Sessional Lecturer shall be supported by professional expenditures. Each
Sessional Lecturer shall receive one hundred and twenty five dollars ($125) for professional development expenditures (in
accordance with
Article 6.45 – Professional Development
Expenditures) for each three (3) credit course
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 49

Collective Agreement 2011-14 taught. Any unused portion of the maximum allowed for professional development
expenditures can be carried forward for two (2) years.
ACADEMIC CAREER
ARTICLE 5.10 – ACADEMIC QUALIFICATIONS GUIDELINES
5.10.1 For the purpose of this Collective Agreement the following definitions shall apply:
(a) "Doctoral degree" shall mean an earned
Ph.D. or other degree formally recognised as equivalent to an earned Ph.D.
(b) "Relevant experience" shall mean any combination of teaching and scholarly activity as defined in Article 5.15 –
Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of Academics and/or equivalent professional experience.
(c) "Professional designation" shall mean a diploma earned as a result of additional experience/training and qualifying
examinations such as, but not limited to C.A., R.I.A., C.G.A., and C.R.E.D.I.F., or others agreed to by the
Parties.
(d) When considering librarians, professional service or, where appropriate, library supervision shall be substituted for
"teaching".
In interpreting these guidelines, the following shall apply:
(a) Article 5.10 – Academic Qualifications
Guidelines
(b) Article 5.15 – Rights, Responsibilities and
Duties of Academics
(c) Article 5.50 – Assessment of a Member's
Performance
(d) For those persons appointed prior to July 1,
2002, Article 2.20 of the 1999-2002 Collective
Agreement shall apply.
5.10.2 Academic Qualifications Guidelines for Appointment or
Promotion of Members of the Teaching Faculty.
(a) For the rank of Lecturer
(i) A Master's degree or equivalent degree; or
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 50

Collective Agreement 2011-14
(ii) A Baccalaureate degree and an appropriate professional designation.
(b) For the rank of Assistant Professor
(i) A Doctoral degree; or
(ii) A Master's degree or equivalent and satisfactory performance of the
Member's responsibilities and duties over a five (5) year period as per Article
8.20 – Procedures For the Award/Denial of a Progress-Through-The-Ranks
Increment and demonstrated evidence of scholarly activity as per Article 5.15 –
Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of
Academics; or
(iii) In the Department of Law and Justice, eight (8) years of full-time university education (or the equivalent) during which
time the Member must have obtained a LL.B. and an appropriate
Master’s degree.
(c) For the rank of Associate Professor
(i) A Doctoral degree; and
(ii) Teaching, the quality of which is satisfactory as determined solely by the method of teaching evaluation mandated by
the Collective Agreement; and
(iii) Evidence of scholarly activity (as per
Article 5.15 – Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of Academics) that is of good quality; and
(iv) At the time the promotion to Associate becomes effective, at least five (5) years of full-time teaching and/or research
in a university or an institution of equivalent level or at least five (5) years of professional experience judged to be relevant
for teaching at the university level.
(v) The requirement for scholarly activity as stipulated under (iii) may be replaced in exceptional cases by a consistently
demonstrated quality of teaching and tutorial activity that clearly indicates outstanding qualities as a teacher as
established by whatever is the generally accepted method of evaluation.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 51

Collective Agreement 2011-14
(d) For the rank of Full Professor
(i) A Doctoral degree; and
(ii) Teaching, the quality of which is satisfactory as determined solely by the method of teaching evaluation mandated by
the Collective Agreement; and
(iii) Shown evidence of scholarly activity
(per Article 5.15 – Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of
Academics) throughout the Member’s career and after her/his promotion to
Associate Professor that ranks as a recognised contribution to the scholarly field or professional activity concerned.
This work must be judged by four (4) external referees, who shall normally be
Full Professors in an academic institution, and at least two (2) of these referees may be nominated by the applicant; and
(iv) Normally, at the time that the promotion to Full Professor becomes effective, at least ten (10) years of full-time
teaching and/or research in a university or in an institution of equivalent level, or has accumulated at least ten (10) years
of professional experience judged to be relevant for teaching at the University level;
Alternative to the requirements for promotion to
Full Professor:
The requirement for scholarly activity stipulated under (iii) may be replaced in extraordinary circumstances by a
requirement that the
Member has consistently shown clearly outstanding qualities as a teacher and has scholarly activity of good quality.
5.10.3 Academic Qualifications Guidelines for Appointment or
Promotion of Professional Librarians and Archivists.
(a) For the rank of General Librarian or General
Archivist
(i) A Master's degree, in Library or Archival
Studies.
(b) For the rank of Assistant Librarian or Assistant
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 52

Collective Agreement 2011-14
Archivist
(i) A Doctoral degree, it being understood that unless this Doctoral degree is in the field of Library Science or Archival
Studies, it shall be accompanied by a
Master's degree or equivalent qualifications in Library Science or
Archival Studies; or
(ii) A Master's degree in Library Science or
Archival Studies and professional service and library or archival supervisory skills relevant to academic librarianship or
archival management, the quality of which is established as clearly satisfactory by whatever is the generally accepted
method of evaluation over a period of four (4) years; and demonstrated evidence of scholarly activity as per Article 5.15 –
Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of
Academics.
(c) For the rank of Associate Librarian or Associate
Archivist
(i) An appropriate Doctoral degree, it being understood that unless this Doctoral degree is in the field of Library Science or
Archival Studies, it shall be accompanied by a Master's degree or equivalent qualifications in Library
Science or Archival Studies; or
In exceptional cases, a Master's degree in Library Science or Archival Studies and professional service and library or
archival supervisory skills relevant to academic librarianship or archival management, the quality of which is established
as clearly satisfactory by whatever is the generally accepted method of evaluation over a period of four (4) years; and
demonstrated evidence of scholarly activity as per
Article 5.15 – Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of Academics since last promotion; and
(ii) At the time the promotion to Associate becomes effective, at least five (5) years of full-time professional service
relevant to academic librarianship or archival management.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 53

Collective Agreement 2011-14
(d) For the rank of Full Librarian or Full Archivist
(i) An appropriate Doctoral degree, it being understood that unless this Doctoral degree is in the field of Library Science or
Archival Studies, it shall be accompanied by a Master's degree or equivalent qualifications in Library
Science or Archival Studies; or
In exceptional cases, a Master's degree in Library Science or Archival Studies and professional service and library or
archival supervisory skills relevant to academic librarianship or archival management, the quality of which is established
as clearly satisfactory by whatever is the generally accepted method of evaluation over a period of four (4) years; and
demonstrated evidence of scholarly activity as per
Article 5.15 – Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of Academics since last promotion; and
(ii) Have demonstrated outstanding professional performance and, in addition, have shown evidence of on-going scholarly
activity of good quality (as per Article 5.15 – Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of
Academics) throughout the Member’s career and after her/his promotion to
Associate Librarian or Associate
Archivist. This work must be judged by four (4) external referees, two (2) of whom may be nominated by the applicant;
and
(iii) Have normally accumulated, at the time the promotion to Full Librarian or Full
Archivist becomes effective, at least ten
(10) years of full-time professional service relevant to academic librarianship or archival management.
5.10.4 Bilingualism.
(a) The Employer may, in consultation with the
Departments/Schools:
(i) Stipulate in advertising for and in
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 54

Collective Agreement 2011-14 appointing Members, that a bilingual applicant is preferred or required;
(ii) Require the appointment of applicants capable of working in either or both of the official languages in order to improve
the balance between courses offered in
English and courses offered in French within any Department/School or
Faculty;
(iii) Require the appointment of applicants capable of working in either or both of the official languages in the Library;
(iv) Consider bilingualism as a desired qualification for those Members who are selected to take on specific
responsibilities.
(b) Letters of appointment shall clearly indicate any bilingual requirements which are to be a condition of being granted
tenure and any assistance that the Employer might agree to provide to the Members for them to meet these requirements.
(c) A Member's performance in both French and
English will be taken into consideration in such matters as promotion and tenure.
5.10.5 A Member who has consistently demonstrated clearly outstanding performance in the areas of
teaching/professional librarianship, research, and/or university governance and administrative duties may, in extraordinary
circumstances, be promoted to the next rank without fulfilling the years of experience criterion as stipulated in paragraphs
5.10.2 (b), (c) and
(d) and paragraphs 5.10.3 (b), (c) and (d) above. The burden of proof of outstanding performance rests with the applicant.
ARTICLE 5.15 – RIGHTS, RESPONSIBILITIES AND DUTIES
OF ACADEMICS
5.15.1 The full-time Members of the Bargaining Unit have rights, duties and responsibilities which derive from their
positions as teachers/professional librarians and scholars working within the University community, and which reflect the
reasonable expectations of the
Members, the University community and the contractual expectations of the Employer. In this
Article, the term Members refers to full-time Members unless otherwise specified.
5.15.2 Members have the right to engage in the following activities:
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 55

Collective Agreement 2011-14
Priority One –
A) Teaching / Professional Librarianship /
Archives Management
B) Scholarly Activity
Priority Two –
C) University Governance and Administrative
Duties
Priority Three –
D) Outside Professional Activities
E) Service to the Community
Priority Four –
F) Other Paid Activity (consistent with clause
5.15.38)
5.15.3 Members have responsibilities relating to items A), B) and C) and are expected to participate actively in items
A), B) and C), although not necessarily in all three (3) in any one (1) given year. A Member's responsibilities related to
item A) shall consist of those teaching or library duties which are assigned by the
Dean/University Librarian as per Article 5.40 –
Academic Workload. A Member's responsibilities related to items B) and C) are inherent in a Member's status as an
academic and thus flow naturally therefrom. Certain specific duties related to item B) and C) may also be assigned by the
Dean/University
Librarian on an ad hoc basis in order to ensure a good and proper functioning of the University. A Member's
responsibilities relating to item D), E) and F) are undertaken voluntarily by the Member.
5.15.4 Some specific features of academic responsibilities are set out in the following sections:
Priority One –
A) Part One - Teaching
5.15.5 Members have an obligation to develop and maintain their scholarly competence and effectiveness as teachers
within the area of their expertise. They shall inform their students regarding their methods of evaluation, which have been
approved by the
Department/School and the Dean, consistent with
Senate policies. They shall also inform their students regarding their instructional methods and seek approval of the
Department/School and of the Dean for substantial changes in instructional methods involving significant increases in
costs or alterations in the
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 56

Collective Agreement 2011-14 established policy of the Department/School, e.g. conversion of a lecture course to a
reading course
5.15.6 While it is recognized that whenever possible there shall be adequate consultation with the Member and the
Department/School as to the assignment of teaching duties, once such teaching duties have been assigned in a fair and
equitable manner by the Dean, it is the responsibility of the Member to teach the assigned courses to students registered
in them at the time and place designated by the Dean in a manner which reflects the area of the content of the course
approved by the Department/School consistent with the University calendar. A Member shall not delegate her/his teaching
duties to another person, the occasional guest lecture excepted. Assignment of teaching duties shall be consistent with
Article 5.40 –
Academic Workload. Teaching responsibilities include being available for reasonable consultation with students at their
teaching locale subject to Article 5.40
– Academic Workload. Members have an obligation to be available to students for consultation during a regular teaching
term for at least one (1) hour per week for a three-credit course. The office hours, or alternate contact hours, shall be
included in the course syllabus. The Department/School will post the office hours.
5.15.7 A Member shall not be required to co-teach a course without the Member’s consent.
5.15.8 Members shall comply with all properly established regulations of the University, which are not at variance with this
Collective Agreement. Members shall accept responsibility for participation in the effective operation of the University,
including responsibilities for academic counselling, accreditation, registration, and the supervision of examinations as
appropriately assigned by the Department/School, the Dean or the Registrar's office consistent with Senate policy. During
examinations, only the head invigilator shall be a faculty Member. The head invigilator shall be selected randomly from the
LUFA full-time faculty membership and the names of those who serve shall be removed from the pool of potential head
invigilators until all remaining Members have served. The names of those
Members not scheduling any of their final examinations through the Registrar’s Office will not be included in the pool for
the examination period concerned.
5.15.9 It is the responsibility of Members to act ethically, fairly, and in a non-discriminatory manner in their dealings with
students and their academic colleagues. It is also the responsibility of Members to foster a free exchange of ideas
including a discussion of differing views, to avoid discrimination, to respect the principles of confidentiality in a manner
consistent with the performance of their academic role, and to
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 57

Collective Agreement 2011-14 acknowledge their indebtedness to students and their academic colleagues in relation to
their own teaching.
5.15.10 Each Member shall have freedom of discussion.
However, in the exercise of this freedom in the classroom, reasonable restraint shall be used in introducing matters
unrelated to her/his subject or discipline.
5.15.11 Members shall be free to organise and to structure classroom and laboratory activities and to adopt reasonable
means to maintain a learning environment, which is both productive and orderly. They shall have the right to rule on the
use by students of electronic devices such as recording devices, calculating devices, and lap-top computers in the
classroom, laboratory or learning situation. Notwithstanding
Members right to rule, students designated by the
Special Needs Office shall have access to electronic devices as determined by the Special Needs Office.
Members shall be informed of any such authorizations and, if necessary, can consult with the Special Needs
Office for possible alterations.
5.15.12 Members shall not alter the schedule or cancel instruction time except with prior permission of the
Dean in any but exceptional circumstances. Such permission shall not be unreasonably refused. Both
Parties agree that every reasonable effort will be made to notify the students affected. Timetable changes of a permanent
nature require the prior permission of the
Dean. Absences are governed by Article 7.20 –
Absence - General.
5.15.13 Members shall have fourteen (14) calendar days following the final exam to submit their final grades or fourteen
(14) calendar days following the deadline for submission of the final item of work as indicated in the course syllabus.
A) Part Two - Professional Librarianship /
Archives Management
5.15.14 Members have an obligation to develop and to maintain their scholarly competence and effectiveness as
librarians within the area of their expertise.
5.15.15 While it is recognised that whenever possible there shall be adequate consultation between the Member and the
University Librarian as to the assignment of duties, once such duties have been assigned in a fair and equitable manner
by the University Librarian, it is the responsibility of the Members to perform their duties at the time and place designated
by the
University Librarian. Assignment of professional library
/ archives management duties shall be consistent with
Article 5.40 – Academic Workload.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 58

Collective Agreement 2011-14
5.15.16 It is the responsibility of Members to deal ethically, fairly, and in a non-discriminatory manner in their dealings with
students and colleagues. It is also the responsibility of Members to foster a free exchange of ideas, to avoid
discrimination, to respect the principles of confidentiality in a manner consistent with the performance of their academic
role, and to acknowledge their indebtedness to their academic colleagues in relation to their own professional activities.
5.15.17 Members shall have the right and responsibility to adopt reasonable means to maintain an orderly and productive
learning environment in the library / archives.
5.15.18 Members, if involved in scheduled work-related activities, shall not alter or cancel such scheduled activities except
with prior permission of the University
Librarian in any but exceptional circumstances. Such permission shall not be unreasonably refused. Both
Parties agree that every reasonable effort will be made to notify the person affected. Absences are governed by Article
7.20 – Absence - General.
B) Scholarly Activity
5.15.19 Members shall have the right and responsibility to devote a reasonable proportion of their time to scholarly
activity.
5.15.20 It is understood that for the purposes of this Collective
Agreement the term "scholarly activity" means:
(a) Research directed towards a contribution to knowledge, and the dissemination of its results; and/or
(b) Participation in those academic activities that contribute to the enhancement, creation and dissemination of
knowledge; and/or
(c) Creative and professional activities which contribute to one's discipline.
5.15.21 Scholarly activity may involve, although not necessarily be limited to, activities of the type set out in the following
list. It is understood that this list does not imply an order of priority. It is also understood that the following forms of
scholarly activity are not necessarily to be given equal weight and application for each discipline when a Member is being
evaluated for an annual increment, merit increment, tenure or promotion. In each case the Member must demonstrate that
the activity is of good quality and is consistent with the contribution to knowledge described in clause 5.15.20 above.
(a) The writing or editing and publication of books,
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 59

Collective Agreement 2011-14 textbooks, journals and of articles, which may be externally reviewed.
(b) The earning of additional appropriate academic and/or professional qualifications.
(c) Research carried out on research contracts.
(d) The writing of case studies.
(e) The development of teaching/library materials, of an innovative sort which have a wider application than the Member's
own teaching/library activities.
(f) The compilation and publication of scholarly bibliographies, or literary work.
(g) The translation and publication of scholarly or literary work.
(h) Literary and artistic works, including recordings and public performances.
(i) Demonstrated leadership in the area of professional education, including workshops.
(j) Creative application of existing knowledge through such activities as consulting or workshops.
5.15.22 The Parties agree that scholarly activity does not normally include research directly related to the immediate and
normal preparation for teaching activity.
5.15.23 Where appropriate in their published work, the
Members shall indicate affiliation with the University and acknowledge their indebtedness to students and their academic
colleagues in relation to their own research.
5.15.24 The Parties encourage all Members of the Bargaining
Unit to deposit one (1) signed copy of their published monographs or reports in the University Library. The
University agrees to pay for reasonable expenses incurred by a Member in making such material available to the Library.
Members are also encouraged to submit their scholarly work to the University’s online repository.
5.15.25 Members have the right to participate in the activities o professional or learned societies and the like, providing
such activities do not conflict with the reasonable fulfilment of assigned duties.
Priority Two –
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 60

Collective Agreement 2011-14
C) University Governance and Administrative
Duties
5.15.26 To the extent consistent with their teaching/library and scholarly responsibilities, Members shall contribute to the
governance of the University through membership on appropriate bodies. It is understood that for the purposes of this
Article, service to the Union will be considered equivalent to service on
Department/School or Senate Committees.
5.15.27 While exercising university governance and administrative responsibilities, Members shall deal ethically with other
university employees and students so that objectivity, fairness, and absence of discrimination are maintained in all
deliberations including assessment of performance of any employee or student. Members shall not infringe on the
academic freedom of academic colleagues or students or breach confidentiality in this regard.
5.15.28 In order to ensure equality of opportunity to participate in university governance, the Employer agrees to circulate
notice of openings on all university bodies above the Department / School / Library level to eligible Members at least two
(2) weeks prior to the time that the vacancies must be filled.
5.15.29 The University’s mandate as a bilingual institution of higher learning in accordance with the Laurentian
University of Sudbury Act entails that the following activities shall also constitute academic work under
University Governance and Administrative Duties:
(a) Formal language training in either of the official languages, French or English, as provided in
Article 3.30 – Bilingualism, as may be required to achieve tenure, and;
(b) The provision of such linguistic services that include, but are not limited to, translation, interpretation, representation
and communication, which contribute to university governance and administrative duties.
Priority Three –
D) Outside Professional Activities
5.15.30 The Parties encourage Members to participate in outside professional activities.
5.15.31 The scope and nature of any professional activities of a substantial nature, whether paid or unpaid shall be
reported in writing to the Dean/University Librarian as
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 61

Collective Agreement 2011-14 part of the annual report of Members. Notwithstanding the above, contractual activities that
would involve
Members spending a total of more than one half (1/2) day a week on a regular basis between Monday and
Friday during a term in which they teach or perform professional library duties shall be reported in writing to the
Dean/University Librarian prior to the signing of the contract or beginning of the work. The Dean/University
Librarian may require the Members not to undertake an activity or to moderate such an activity on the grounds that the
time involved would or does interfere with the Member's academic obligations as defined in this Collective Agreement. A
reasonable period of time shall be allowed for the Members to comply. The appropriateness of the decisions of the
Dean/University Librarian on these matters is subject to grievance and arbitration.
5.15.32 When undertaking outside professional activities,
Members retain the rights and responsibilities associated with academic freedom.
5.15.33 When a Member's outside professional activities involve the use of the University's facilities, supplies or services,
permission for their use shall be approved in writing or through email by the appropriate University
Administrator. Such permission shall not be unreasonably refused. These services shall normally be paid for at the
prevailing internal University user rate, unless the University Administrator agrees in writing to waive all or part of the
fee(s).
E) Service to the Community
5.15.34 The Parties encourage Members to offer service to the community.
5.15.35 The rights and responsibilities of Members who offer service to the community shall be the same as for those
Members who participate in outside professional activities, as modified by clause 5.15.36 below.
5.15.36 When a Member's service to the community involves the use of the University's facilities, supplies or services,
permission for their use shall be approved in writing or through email by the appropriate University
Administrator. Such permission shall not be unreasonably refused. These services shall normally be paid for at the
prevailing external University user rate, unless the University Administrator agrees in writing to waive all or part of the
fee(s).
Priority Four –
F) Other Paid Activity
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 62

Collective Agreement 2011-14
5.15.37 Faculty Members have the right to engage in other paid activity
5.15.38 All such activities shall be governed by clause 5.15.31 above, except the annual report where such reporting shall
be optional to the Member.
ARTICLE 5.20 – APPOINTMENT AND RENEWAL
Appointment of Full-time Members of the Bargaining Unit–
5.20.1 New appointments that fall within the Bargaining Unit shall normally be advertised:
(a) Within the University and
(b) Outside the University
In suitable national and discipline publications such as University Affairs, CAUT Bulletin and other publications that may
be especially directed to professionals who belong to any of the four (4) designated employment equity groups.
Advertisements shall contain a clause stating that
Laurentian University is committed to employment equity.
5.20.2 (a) Appointments shall be made by the Vice-
President, Academic and Provost on behalf of the Employer and on the recommendation of the Dean/University Librarian
and the written recommendation of the majority of the
Members of the Department/School concerned after scheduled, minuted meeting(s) with Department/School Members.
Individual Members (including those on leave) may choose to vote in person, by email or by facsimile. Proxy voting is not
permitted.
(b) The letter of appointment shall indicate the
Department/School to which the Member will be assigned.
(c) In the event that an appointee has duties and responsibilities in more than one
Department/School or program, then one
Department/School shall be declared to be the
Member's Department/School. Wherever in this Collective Agreement recommendations or evaluations of a Member's
performance are required from a Department/School, in addition to the recommendation or evaluation from the assigned
Department/School, the other
Department(s)/School(s) or program(s) shall also submit their recommendation or evaluation; these recommendations
shall carry a weight approximately proportional to the
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 63

Collective Agreement 2011-14 duties and responsibilities of the Member in each program/Department/School.
(d) Advertisements for all vacant positions shall refer to the Union website where applicants can access the Collective
Agreement.
5.20.3 If a number of applicants have been judged to be substantially equal in qualifications and appropriateness of
academic specialization, priority shall be given to Canadian citizens, permanent residents, and persons on minister's
permits.
5.20.4 (a) Where selection has to take place among equally qualified applicants, relevant criteria for appointment shall
include teaching/professional, scholarly potential and employment equity goals.
(b) In disciplines where it is difficult to attract qualified faculty, and/or in order to achieve employment equity goals, the
Employer and the Union will work together to devise and implement innovative appointment arrangements in order to
combine appointments with the opportunity to complete
Doctoral degrees.
(c) All tenured, tenure-track and permanent sessional Members of the Department/School shall have the right to
participate in all aspects of the appointment process. The
Chair/Director of the Department/School shall issue a notice to all eligible Members of the
Department/School requesting that they indicate their intent to serve on the
Department/School Search Committee.
Members shall indicate their intention to participate in the process within five (5) working days. Members who elect to
participate in the Department/School Search
Committee shall attend all meetings and interviews in order to be able to vote for the recommendation of a candidate or
short list of candidates to the Department/School. The
Department/School Search Committee shall consist of at least five (5) eligible Members, with at least one (1) female and
one (1) male
Member. Where this requirement cannot be fulfilled, the Dean/University Librarian, in consultation with the
Department/School, shall appoint a suitable Member from another
Department/School to the search committee.
(d) Search committees shall be proactive in the recruitment of applicants from the four (4) employment equity groups
outlined in Article
5.25 – Employment Equity. If the tentative shor list of applicants does not include at least one
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 64

Collective Agreement 2011-14
(1) member of an equity group, the search committee shall submit an explanation. If the
Dean/University Librarian is not satisfied with the explanation, the Dean/University Librarian may change the short list. If
the short list contains fewer than three (3) names, this change can only be an additional name.
Alternatively, the Dean/University Librarian shall work together with the Department/School to substitute one (1) of the
short-listed names.
5.20.5 Appointments shall be made only to the ranks referred to in this Collective Agreement, viz, Lecturer,
Assistant Professor, Associate Professor, Full
Professor, and the corresponding library ranks
(General Librarian/Archivist, Assistant
Librarian/Archivist, Associate Librarian/Archivist, Full
Librarian/Archivist).
5.20.6 Appointments shall be made only to the status categories referred to in this Collective Agreement, viz, limited term,
probationary and tenured. From time to time the Parties may agree to other categories.
5.20.7 Candidates from within the Bargaining Unit shall be entitled to consideration for all advertised posts.
5.20.8 All letters of appointment shall normally be signed no later than the start of a teaching term in which a
Member must first teach, i.e. by September 1, January
1 and May 1. Letters of appointment shall follow the format outlined in Appendix F – Standard Letter of
Employment and Offer of Employment. No letter of appointment shall contain any conditions not consistent with this
Collective Agreement. A copy of the letter of appointment, or revisions thereof, shall be forwarded to the Union at the
same time as the original is sent to the applicant. The applicant’s telephone/fax numbers and email address, as well as
any other means of contacting the applicant will be included if the applicant has provided them.
5.20.9 Upon appointment new Members shall provide the
Vice-President, Academic and Provost copies of their birth certificate, or equivalent document, and certified copies of their
academic degrees and, if required for the position, their professional qualifications.
Limited Term Appointments –
5.20.10 Limited Term appointments are appointments that carry no implication of renewal or continuation beyond the
stated term and no implication that the appointee shall be considered for tenure. Limited term appointees must be
assigned to an academic
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 65

Collective Agreement 2011-14
Department/School and shall be considered
Members unless excluded by Article 2.15 –
Recognition of the Bargaining Unit. Limited term appointments are utilised:
(a) To bring distinguished visitors to the
University.
(b) For exchange appointments.
(c) To provide replacements for Members on leave.
(d) To respond to specific academic needs which the Employer, for academic and/or budgetary reasons, does not wish to
result in an appointment in the probationary stream. This shall be done in consultation with the Union who shall not
unreasonably withhold its agreement.
(e) For appointments to programs with provisional funding or of a trial nature.
5.20.11 Where appointments must be made urgently, the
Vice-President, Academic and Provost may, with the agreement of the Parties, authorise exceptions to the procedures in
clauses 5.20.1 and 5.20.4 above. Such agreement shall not be unreasonably withheld.
5.20.12 The Vice-President, Academic and Provost has the discretion, after consultation with the
Department/School and the Dean/University
Librarian, to re-appoint the holder of a term appointment without further advertisement. Should the Employer choose to
re-advertise the post, the incumbent may apply, but retains no right of preference over other acceptable applicants. The
normal procedures for appointment will apply.
5.20.13 Term appointees may not apply for promotion in the final year of their term appointment, unless they had been
prevented from applying in the year immediately preceding. A term appointee reappointed to a further term appointment
or a term appointee reappointed to a probationary position shall be reappointed to the same rank that she/he held in the
previous appointment. A Member so reappointed may, subsequent to reappointment, also apply for a promotion as per
Article 5.65 – Promotion
Procedures. If the Member is granted a promotion, the said promotion shall be retroactive to the date of the Member's
reappointment.
5.20.14 Term appointments shall be limited to a total of three
(3) years, except by agreement of the Parties. In cases where the limited term appointment is a
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 66

Collective Agreement 2011-14 replacement for an academic administrator, the appointment may be for a term up to five
(5) years.
The initial term may be for less than a full academic year, but reappointment shall normally be for a full twelve (12) month
period. The term limits (three (3) or five (5)) shall apply whether or not the term appointments are consecutive or
intermittent.
5.20.15 Non-renewal of term appointments shall not be subject to grievance.
5.20.16 For the duration of this Collective Agreement, the
Employer agrees that the total number of limited term appointments will not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the total
number of faculty members except with the agreement of the Parties.
Probationary Appointments/Tenure Appointments –
5.20.17 Probationary appointments are defined as appointments lasting up to a maximum of five (5) years, during which
time the Employer and the
Employee are afforded an opportunity for mutual appraisal.
5.20.18 Probation does not imply that the Employer will grant tenure at the end of the probationary period; it does imply
that the Employer will give serious consideration to awarding tenure.
5.20.19 Should a Member holding a term appointment wish to apply for a probationary appointment, the Member's
application shall be considered in the normal way along with all other applications for the position.
Should such a Member be appointed to the probationary position, at the Member’s discretion, the
Member’s probationary period may be reduced by up to the number of years that the Member has served in limited term
appointment(s) to a maximum of three
(3) years.
5.20.20 Faculty appointed on probation will serve a maximum probationary period based on the academic rank at which
the appointment is made. Faculty appointed at the rank of Lecturer/General Librarian or Assistant
Professor/Librarian will serve a five (5) year probationary period. Faculty appointed at the rank of
Associate Professor/Librarian and Full
Professor/Librarian will serve a three (3) year probationary period. Where a Member is appointed at the rank of Full
Professor/Librarian the Employer may grant tenure on appointment. Under exceptional circumstances and upon
recommendation of both the
Department/School and the Vice-President,
Academic and Provost, where a Member is appointed at the rank of Associate Professor/Librarian the
University may grant tenure on appointment, provided that the new Member is tenured at another recognised university.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 67

Collective Agreement 2011-14
5.20.21 An Associate Professor/Librarian or Full
Professor/Librarian who has at least three (3) years service to the University, who has applied for a probationary
appointment, shall be considered for such an appointment on the basis of the criteria listed in Article 5.60 – Tenure
Evaluation Procedures.
Should such a Member be appointed to the position, it shall be a final probationary appointment of one (1) year with
tenure evaluation to begin by September 30 of that year.
5.20.22 In the case of persons appointed at the rank of
Lecturer/General Librarian and Assistant
Professor/Librarian, the initial probationary appointment shall be for a period of three (3) years.
(a) In their initial letter of appointment by the Vice-
President, Academic and Provost and in their annual evaluation letters by the
Deans/University Librarian, all Members on initial probationary contract shall be notified that they shall begin to undergo a
renewal evaluation by the FACULTY PERSONNEL
COMMITTEE no later than September 30 of the final year in their initial probationary contract.
(b) Subject to satisfactory performance as outlined in paragraph 5.20.22 (c) below, the initial probationary appointment will
be followed by a further two (2) year probationary appointment with a tenure evaluation to take place in the final year of
that second appointment or as per Article 5.60 – Tenure
Evaluation Procedures.
(c) The decision whether or not to offer a second two (2) year probationary appointment shall be reached on the basis of a
judgement of satisfactory performance under procedures se out under Article 5.45 – Annual Report for
Members, Article 5.60 – Tenure Evaluation
Procedures and Article 8.20 – Procedures for the Award/Denial for a Progress-Through-the-
Ranks Increment;
(d) In assessing the applicant’s progress toward meeting the requirements for tenure outlined in paragraphs 5.60.3 (d)
and (e) of Article 5.60
– Tenure Evaluation Procedures, the Faculty
Personnel Committee shall comment on each aspect of these criteria. The Faculty
Personnel Committee should also comment
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 68

Collective Agreement 2011-14 on the rate of progress shown during the initial probationary period. If the performance is
found unsatisfactory the Faculty Personnel
Committee may recommend that the applicant not be offered a final probationary appointment.
5.20.23 In the case of persons appointed at the rank of
Associate Professor/Librarian and Full
Professor/Librarian, the initial appointment shall be a three (3) year probationary appointment with a tenure evaluation to
take place in the final year of the appointment, except as modified in clause 5.20.20 above.
5.20.24 The tenure evaluation is to be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in Article 5.60
– Tenure Evaluation Procedures, and will result in a decision either to award tenure or to allow the appointment to lapse.
Adjunct Appointments –
5.20.25 When it is appropriate for scholarly or professional reasons, a person may be appointed to a position as
Adjunct Professor by the Vice-President, Academic and Provost upon recommendation by
Departments/Schools and Deans for a period with defined privileges and voluntary responsibilities in scholarly activity.
Each month at Senate, the Vice-
President, Academic and Provost shall table as a separate Information item a list of any newly appointed Adjunct faculty
members including their names, Department/School affiliations, periods of appointment along with a justification for each
appointment, highest degree held, year obtained, current institution and rank (position), at that institution. All Adjunct
faculty members shall also be included in the faculty listing on Department/School websites.
5.20.26 Adjunct appointments shall also become Sessional
Members if they carry any of the duties consistent with this Collective Agreement. Such Members shall be paid for thesis
supervision as per Article 5.40 –
Academic Workload. However, Adjunct faculty members may collaborate in scholarly activities with
Members without becoming Sessional Members.
5.20.27 There shall be no new appointments to the currently designated Affiliate Professor category. Professors currently
designated as Affiliate Professors are eligible to be transferred to the Adjunct status at the expiry of their current term of
appointment.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 69

Collective Agreement 2011-14
Cross Appointments –
5.20.28 When it is appropriate for academic teaching/scholarly or professional reasons, Members may be appointed to
more than one (1)
Department/School of the University such that the salary of the Member is charged to one (1) fiscal
Department/School, but she/he is named to another
Department/School in which she/he has a sustained academic teaching/scholarly or professional interest.
Such appointments shall be called cross appointments.
5.20.29 A cross appointment shall only be made with the consent of the Members of all Departments/Schools concerned.
5.20.30 A cross appointment shall be made by the Employer for a fixed period not exceeding five (5) years, and may be
renewed or altered with the consent of the
Member and on the recommendations of the
Department(s)/School(s) concerned. The termination or alteration of a cross appointment, except for cause, shall not in
itself jeopardize the Member's appointment with the University in the
Department/School of primary responsibility, as specified in clause 5.20.33 below. Notwithstanding any of the foregoing, a
cross appointment will terminate upon the termination of the appointment in the Department/School of primary
responsibility as specified in clause 5.20.33 below.
5.20.31 The sources and level of administrative and academic teaching/scholarly support available to the
Member with a cross appointment shall be mutually agreed by the Member and the Department/School concerned and
shall be confirmed in writing by the
Chair/Director. In the event that the cross-appointed
Member is recommended by either
Department/School to teach in the Department/School to which she/he has been cross appointed, the teaching
assignment will be issued by the primary
Dean of the Member and only with the agreement of the other Dean (if applicable) and after consultation with both
Chair(s)/Director(s).
5.20.32 In the case of a cross appointment, the assessment procedures and criteria to be used by the cross- appointed
Department/School in considering the
Member for renewal, tenure and promotion shall be those of the Department/School of primary responsibility as specified
in paragraphs 5.50.6 (b),
5.50.6 (c), 5.50.6 (d), 5.50.6(e), 5.50.6 (f), 5.50.6 (g) and 5.50.6 (i) of Article 5.50 – Assessment of a
Member’s Performance only and are subject to clause 5.20.33 below.
5.20.33 The Chair/Director and the eligible Members of the cross-appointed Departments/Schools shall be
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 70

Collective Agreement 2011-14 consulted formally during the renewal, tenure and promotion process. This consultation
shall not involve examination of the academic dossier but shall be limited to a written assessment concerning the
contributions the applicant has made to the cross- appointed Department/School in the areas outlined in
Article 5.15 – Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of
Academics and shall be weighed by the FACULTY
PERSONNEL COMMITTEE pursuant to paragraph
5.50.6 (k) of Article 5.50 – Assessment of a Member’s
Performance. Members who are eligible to vote and participate in the assessment of applications shall do so in their own
Department/School of primary responsibility. In cases where an eligible Member of the applicants cross-appointed
Department/School acts as an assessor in the applicant’s
Department/School of primary responsibility pursuant to paragraph 5.50.6 (j) of Article 5.50 – Assessment of a Member’s
Performance, the eligible Member shall not be permitted to vote or participate in the assessment of the applicant by the
applicant’s cross- appointed Department/School given that in no case shall an eligible Member be permitted to vote and
participate in the assessment in more than one instance.
5.20.34 The letter of cross appointment shall state the privileges and sharing, if any, of duties and responsibilities between
or among
Departments/Schools.
5.20.35 Members holding a cross appointment shall be eligible to attend meetings of all
Departments/Schools to which they are appointed, but may vote, be elected to or appointed to committees only in their
Academic
Department/School of primary responsibility.
5.20.36 Qualified persons from the Northern Ontario School of Medicine may be cross-appointed to
Departments/Schools within Laurentian University subject to the approval of the Department/School.
Such persons shall be Members of the Union if they carry any of the duties consistent with this Collective
Agreement. Such Members shall be paid for thesis supervision according to Article 5.40 – Academic
Workload.
Spousal Hiring Appointments –
5.20.37 When an applicant has been recommended by a
Department/School for a probationary or tenured appointment and has a spouse or partner who may be qualified for an
academic position, a
Department/School appropriate to the discipline of the spouse or partner may recommend a one (1) to three (3) year term
appointment without advertising under the following conditions:
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 71

Collective Agreement 2011-14
(a) The Vice-President, Academic and Provost has confirmed the availability of a position within the Department/School in
question;
(b) The Chair/Director has made available an application file for viewing by all Members of that Department/School and
has arranged interviews and open meetings with the applicant and the Members in the
Department/School, on campus or through
Telecommunications Technology;
(c) A majority of the full-time Members of the
Department/School by vote have approved of the recommendation, including the term of the appointment when
applicable;
(d) The appointment has been approved by the
Vice President, Academic and Provost after review of the application file and the
Department/School recommendation;
(e) The decision of the Vice-President, Academic and Provost is not subject to grievance.
5.20.38 Notwithstanding the provisions of clause 5.20.14 above, an appointment made under the provisions may be
extended, subject to Department/School approval, for a period of up to five (5) years in total.
5.20.39 At any time, the total number of spousal appointments shall not exceed ten (10).
Appointments and Accreditations to the Faculty of
Graduate Studies –
5.20.40 All Members with a PhD or equivalent qualification are eligible to teach graduate courses or conjoint
graduate-senior undergraduate courses. However, to supervise graduate theses Members must be appointed to the
Faculty of Graduate Studies.
Members may apply at any time to the Director of
Graduate Studies for appointment to the Faculty of
Graduate Studies. The requirements for appointment shall be publicly available to all Members. All applications for
appointment will be evaluated in accordance with the Policy of the Council of the
Faculty of Graduate Studies.
ARTICLE 5.25 – EMPLOYMENT EQUITY
5.25.1 The Parties support the principle of employment equity as defined by Provincial and Federal Laws and the
Senate/Board of Governors approved Policy on
Employment Equity.
5.25.2 Employment Equity
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 72

Collective Agreement 2011-14
(a) The Parties pledge themselves to work to increase the proportion of faculty Members who are members of the four (4)
designated employment equity groups (women, native people, persons with disabilities and members of visible minorities)
to an equitable level in each discipline.
(b) To determine an equitable proportion of members of the four (4) designated employment equity groups for each
discipline, the Parties shall consider among other factors the number of Doctoral applicants in Canadian universities as
revealed by Statistics Canada data.
5.25.3 The Vice-President, Academic and Provost shall support employment equity by:
(a) promoting awareness of the University’s commitment to non-discrimination and to the promotion of equity in the
employment status of Members in the designated employment equity groups;
(b) ensuring proper training on equitable employment practices for all
Departments/Schools hiring new members;
(c) providing annual reports to the Employer and the Union on:
(i) the total number of applicants and the number of self-identified applicants by employment equity group for each vacant
position for which a search has been conducted,
(ii) the composition by employment equity group of the Members in each
Department/School, by rank and status of appointment, as voluntarily reported by Members,
(iii) the percentage of employment equity groups by discipline in graduate degree programs in Canada, if available,
(iv) other matters deemed necessary to monitor the effectiveness of this Article.
5.25.4 In order to increase awareness of the University’s employment equity goals and to support non- discriminatory
interview and hiring practices, full-time
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 73

Collective Agreement 2011-14
Members shall make every reasonable effort to attend the training sessions on equitable employment practices offered by
the University for their respective
Department/School.
ARTICLE 5.30 – ABORIGINAL EQUITY INITIATIVE
5.30.1 Following from the 2007 Report of the Aboriginal
Equity Initiative Committee mandated by the 2005-08
Collective Agreement, the Employer and the Union agree that a series of active measures are required to appoint a larger
number of qualified Aboriginal professors and librarians at Laurentian University, particularly outside Aboriginal-specific
programs.
5.30.2 The Employer agrees to develop a “grow-our-own” program to recruit and appoint Aboriginal professors and
librarians to probationary appointments, who, on the condition of agreeing to work at Laurentian as professors/librarians
for a minimum of three (3) years, shall be supported in completing the academic qualifications needed for tenure (per
Article 5.10 –
Academic Qualifications Guidelines). The details of the program are to be agreed to by the Employer and the Union in
consultation with the Office of Academic
Native Affairs. Each September, the Employer shall canvas Departments/Schools with upcoming probationary
appointment vacancies, and assuming the Department’s/School’s agreement to participate in this program, shall make
every reasonable effort to appoint at least two (2) Aboriginal candidates under the program every year beginning July 1,
2009.
ARTICLE 5.35 – NEWLY HIRED MEMBERS
5.35.1 In the year the Collective Agreement is being negotiated, all new hires whose appointments are effective July 1 or
before the signing of a new
Collective Agreement shall receive all increases in salary for that year that become effective July 1, except for the PTR
increment, merit increment, or any other increase explicitly excluded by the new
Collective Agreement, irrespective of the actual date of commencement of employment.
ARTICLE 5.40 – ACADEMIC WORKLOAD
5.40.1 The academic workload shall be assigned in a fair and equitable manner. To help ensure this goal, each
Member of a Department/School shall receive a copy of the Chair's/Director’s recommendations to the
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 74

Collective Agreement 2011-14
Dean/University Librarian on the Member's own workload and a summary of the recommendations on all other Members
in the Department/School, including any recommendations for overloads, prior to the recommendations being forwarded
to the
Dean/University Librarian. Each Member shall receive by June 15 a copy of the Dean's/University
Librarian's decision on these recommendations.
5.40.2 The academic workload of a full-time Member during the academic year includes: (a) teaching/professional
librarianship/archives management, including the supervision of graduate and undergraduate students;
(b) scholarly activity, including commitments to external granting agencies; (c) University governance, administrative
duties, and other contributions to the University. The normal guideline for the distribution of the workload among the three
(3) main workload components is: forty percent (40%) teaching/professional librarianship/archives management, including
the supervision of graduate and undergraduate students; forty percent (40%) scholarly activity, including commitments to
external granting agencies; and twenty percent (20%)
University governance, administrative duties, and other contributions to the University.
5.40.3 The assignment of the workload shall be communicated in reasonable detail, in writing, to the
Member by June 15 by the Dean/University Librarian.
The Dean/University Librarian shall by April 15 request the written advice of the Department/School concerned. The
Chair/Director shall submit the written advice of the Department/School by May 1 and the Dean/University Librarian shall
normally accept the advice of the Department/School. The time-tabling of the teaching load/library assignment shall be
communicated in writing to the Member by
July 15 by the Dean/University Librarian after consultation with the Registrar. For the duration of this Collective Agreement
the Registrar shall have final authority in time-tabling all courses.
5.40.4 The composition of the workload of Members may vary with their discipline, and will take into account the
capabilities of the Members, the need to maximize their potential and any obligations placed on them within the
University's operations, consistent with the terms of this Collective Agreement. In the assignment of teaching loads, the
Deans, in consultation with the Departments/Schools, shall consider not only the number of courses taught by a
Member, but the size and type of such courses as well as administrative and other duties. Members’ workloads shall also
be subject to the following maximum norms for assigned workloads.
(a) Teaching Members: In the assignment of teaching loads by the Deans, in consultation
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 75

Collective Agreement 2011-14 with the academic Departments/Schools, the maximum normal teaching load per academic
year shall be two (2) full courses or twelve (12) credit equivalents in the Faculty of Science and Engineering and two and
one-half (2 ½) full courses or fifteen (15) credit equivalents in other Faculties.
(b) Professional Librarian and Archivist Members:
In the assignment of workloads by the
University Librarian, the normal hours of scheduled student contact shall not exceed twelve (12) per week, scheduled
fairly and equitably and on the recommendation of the
Department.
(c) Notwithstanding paragraph 5.40.4 (a) above,
Members on a twelve (12) month limited-term appointment may have a teaching load of three (3) credits above the normal
teaching load. This above-normal teaching load shall be for a maximum of twelve (12) months only.
Any extension of the twelve (12) month limited-term appointment or any additional limited-term appointments to the
Member shall be according to the normal teaching load as specified as per paragraph 5.40.4 (a) above.
5.40.5 The Dean/University Librarian may include in
Members' workloads any teaching/professional library or archival assignment related to their discipline and any
on-campus administrative activity that the
Dean/University Librarian considers necessary for the effective operation of the Faculty/Library or of the
University program. With regard to the load for teaching/professional librarianship/professional archival work, generally
prevailing past practices shall apply unless these practices have been the result of
Members undertaking voluntarily unpaid overloads to maintain the integrity of programmes or service commitments in
Department/Schools which have suffered complement reductions due to budgetary pressures or unless specific
provisions in this contract state otherwise.
5.40.6 The determination of the workload shall be subject to the following conditions:
(a) The Dean/University Librarian, in accordance with Article 3.10 – Academic Freedom, shall not impose specific
scholarly tasks other than the teaching/professional librarianship duties referred to in clause 5.40.5 above. Specific tasks
related to the internal governance of the
Department/School shall not be imposed by the Dean/University Librarian, except for the appointment of an Acting
Chair/Director as in
Articles 9.15 – Selection of Chairs/Directors and 9.20 – Term of Office of Chairs/Directors.
The Dean/University Librarian may assign
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 76

Collective Agreement 2011-14 specific responsibilities concerning a
University-related community activity in consultation with the Member. The Member shall not unreasonably refuse.
(b) The Dean/University Librarian shall normally not impose on any individual a workload in excess of that which in the
past has generally been applicable to Members within the
Faculty/Library to which the Member belongs.
The Parties agree that excessive overload teaching/professional library work is undesirable and for that reason
compensation for teaching-related overloads from all sources, including courses administered through the Centre for
Continuing Education, shall be limited to a maximum of twelve (12) credits per year with a maximum of nine (9) credits in
either the Fall/Winter or the
Spring/Summer sessions, the Parties further agree that the twelve (12) credit overload allowance shall be limited to three
(3) consecutive years.
Where the above limitation on total compensation to a Member involves a component from the supervision of a distance
education course(s) according to clause
8.40.5 of Article 8.40 – Distance Education
Courses, the University shall make available marking assistance as required and in keeping with the degree of limitation.
(c) From time to time, the Dean/University
Librarian, in consultation with the
Department/School may request a Member to undertake additional duties over and above the normal workload. In such
instances, an overload payment shall be made, as in Article
8.35 – Overloads. The Member shall not unreasonably refuse such assignments.
Members who believe they are entitled to overload payments shall apply through the
Dean/University Librarian to the Vice-
President, Academic and Provost within ten
(10) working days after the assignment of the workload. The Vice-President, Academic and
Provost shall provide an answer, in writing, to the Member within ten (10) working days of her/his application. If negative,
the decision shall be accompanied with reasons.
(d) In the event that a workload assignment, with regard to the courses taught or professional librarian duties or other
assigned duties, is not acceptable to the Member or the
Department/School, after discussion with the
Dean/University Librarian, the Member or the
Department/School may appeal to the Vice-
President, Academic and Provost by July 15.
The decision of the Vice-President, Academic
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 77

Collective Agreement 2011-14 and Provost shall be communicated in writing to the Member and Department/School
before
August 1.
(e) The credits for courses approved by Senate
(Council on English Language Programmes
(CELP) and Conseil des programmes en français (CPF)) shall not be altered when the
Dean assigns the teaching of any of these courses to a Member.
(f) When a Member is assigned to teach two (2) or more courses at the same time and location, she/he shall receive
workload credit for the course with maximum credits.
5.40.7 Once assigned, workloads shall not be altered except in cases of emergency. If a proposed workload must be
altered, such alteration will be taken into consideration in the annual performance evaluation.
However, alterations for reasonable program requirements and low enrolment may be made to
Winter and Spring session courses by October 1.
If the Dean, for non-emergency reasons, deems it necessary to alter the workload of a Member once it has been
assigned, the Dean must obtain the agreement of the Member.
Any alteration to a Member’s workload, including any associated overload payments shall be communicated to each
Member of the
Department/School within five (5) working days after the Member has been formally notified of the change.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this Article, when an assigned course(s) is cancelled because of zero registration in the
course(s) there arises an obligation on the part of the Member to undertake additional work in order to maintain fairness
and equity within the Department/School. The nature and extent of such work shall be determined in discussions between
the Member, the Chair of the
Department/School and the Dean. In the event that the Member was scheduled to receive an overload stipend such a
stipend should be reduced appropriately. In the case where additional work assigned is in the form of a course, such
course shall be one the Member has taught in the last two (2) years, unless otherwise agreed to by the Member.
5.40.8 The determination of the workload for Members of the teaching faculty shall also be subject to the following
conditions:
(a) A Member is entitled to one (1) term without scheduled teaching among the Fall, Winter
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 78

Collective Agreement 2011-14 and Spring terms as part of her/his normal workload. The scheduled teaching duties as
part of a Member’s normal workload shall normally be in the Fall and Winter terms of the academic year.
(b) In the case of correspondence or off-campus courses, consultation times shall be arranged for the teaching locale in
accordance with the requirements of the subject matter. The
Chair/Director shall outline the norms in consultation with the Department/School.
(c) In the case of evening courses, the Dean shall not assign another course scheduled to begin within twelve (12) hours
of the scheduled end of the evening course unless the Member agrees to this in writing.
(d) With the exception of Members who are teaching at this University for the first time or teaching in a new program, no
Member shall be required in an academic year to prepare for more than one (1) full course or two (2) half
(1/2) courses (or equivalent) which she/he has not taught at least once during the previous four (4) years. Normally, no
Member shall be required to undertake such course preparation more than once every two (2) years, nor shall any
Member be required to undertake new course preparation unless requested to do so by June 1. Where a course is
replaced by a renamed or renumbered version of what is essentially the same course in the same language, it shall be
deemed to be the same course for purposes of this Article.
(e) Members may be required to supervise or develop distance education courses as part of their normal workload subject
to provisions of
Article 8.40 – Distance Education Courses.
Members whose appointments specifically included the development of distance education courses as part of their normal
workload may be assigned such duties for the duration of their contract(s).
(f) In order to enhance the ability of Members to undertake scholarly activity, it is desirable to schedule the teaching
activities in such a way as to create blocks of time free of scheduled teaching activities. For the Fall and Winter terms, the
scheduling of courses shall permit every Member to have at least one (1) day per week for scholarly activity during which
she/he is not expected to teach scheduled classes.
Members wishing to create additional such days or blocks of time without scheduled
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 79

Collective Agreement 2011-14 teaching shall approach the Chair/Director of the Departments/Schools and the Dean with
an appropriate request. These officials shall make reasonable efforts to accommodate such requests within the
constraints imposed by requirements of offering programs and courses to students. When competing requests for time
blocks without scheduled teaching cannot be met for all applicants, priority shall be given to those individuals who earlier
have been unsuccessful in making such a request, provided that these were based on bona fide requirements to enhance
scholarly activity.
(g) Full-time Members teaching in programs where the preparation of a thesis is mandatory for students have an
obligation to participate in the thesis supervision provided that they are qualified to do so. However, the Parties agree that
the close working relationship desirable for the successful preparation of a thesis is best achieved under conditions that
allow for mutual choice on the part of the Member and the student before entering the supervisor/student relationship.
(h) Notwithstanding paragraph 5.40.6 (e) above, when a Member undertakes academic supervision of an individual
student in a program offered by Laurentian University, when such work is over and above the normal workload, such
supervisory work shall be recognized upon its successful defence or completion as follows:
Monetary value at
Supervisory work Credit value
$1,000 / credit
PhD Thesis 3 $3,000
Master’s Thesis or 1 $1,000
Advanced Practicum in
Social Work
PhD or Master’s Research ½ $500
Project, Research Essay,
Directed Reading Seminar or Independent Study
Undergraduate Thesis (cid:110) $333 where mandatory
Undergraduate Directed ¼ $250
Reading Seminar or
Independent Study where mandatory
(i) The above credits may be shared by agreement between two (2) or more
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 80

Collective Agreement 2011-14
Members who have contributed to the thesis or other supervision. In cases of disagreement, the Dean shall arbitrate the
proportions.
(ii) A Member’s teaching credits for individual supervisions as outlined in this paragraph can be accumulated towards a
reduction of the Member’s normal teaching load to a maximum of three (3) credits release per academic year. Unused
credits can be carried over to subsequent years. The scheduling of the reduction shall be with the mutual agreement of
the
Member and her/his Dean.
(iii) Alternatively, Members may be paid the credit value accumulated for any supervisory work in their professional
expenditure account. At any time,
Members may transfer the monetary value of the accumulated credits into their professional development expenditure
account.
(iv) Once the supervisory work has been completed, it shall be the responsibility of the Member to report such completion
to the Dean on a form co- signed by her/his Chair/Director. The
Dean’s Office shall either register the credit on the Member’s workload credit account to be created in Datatel or transfer
the funds to the Member’s professional development expenditure account, as the Member directs.
(v) Based on existing program requirements, the Dean shall identify those programs which have mandatory supervisory
needs as per paragraph
5.40.8 (g) above. Any Member planning to supervise an individual student in another program for credit under this
paragraph needs the prior authorization of the Dean.
(vi) The subparagraphs 5.40.8 (h) (i) to
5.40.8 (h) (iv) above do not apply to
Research Chairs who already received a teaching load reduction.
5.40.9 The determination of the workload for professional librarians shall also be subject to the following conditions:
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 81

Collective Agreement 2011-14
(a) Members may be requested to offer service during one (1) evening per week and if requested, they shall not
unreasonably refuse, provided that such requests are made on a fair and equitable basis.
(b) Professional librarians may be expected to carry library supervisory duties.
5.40.10 In order to promote scholarly activity, as defined by section B) Scholarly Activity of Article 5.15 – Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of Academics within the
University, a Member may have her/his teaching/library service workload altered. Requests for workload reductions as a
result of other paid activity shall be considered in accordance with the provisions of Article 7.35 – Voluntary Reduced
Workload. However, contract research where the
Member is paid a stipend not to exceed twenty thousand dollars ($20,000) for her/his services may be considered under
this provision.
(a) Without compensation to the University:
For such an assignment to become operative, it shall require the recommendation of the
Department/School, of the Dean/University
Librarian, and approval of the Vice-President,
Academic and Provost. Faculty Members who receive one (1) or more course reductions for purposes of enhancing
scholarly activity, including the preparation of teaching materials for the Centre for Continuing Education, shall not be
entitled to overloads as per paragraph
5.40.6 (b) above. This restriction shall also apply to Librarians whose workload is also reduced for scholarly purposes.
(b) With compensation to the University:
A Member with a regular teaching load may elect to buy-out of up to fifteen (15) credits of teaching load over five (5)
years, not to exceed six (6) credits per year, or the equivalent of professional library service in order to concentrate on
research activities. It is acknowledged that certain grants may require a reduction in teaching loads exceeding fifteen (15)
credits. The buy-out must be applied for no later than April 1 of the year preceding the academic year for which it is
requested and the Dean/University Librarian shall not unreasonably refuse such request.
The Dean/University Librarian shall communicate her/his decision by May 1. The
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 82

Collective Agreement 2011-14 buy-out shall cover the actual cost (including benefits) to replace the teaching/professional
library work but shall not exceed the overload or sessional rate of pay as appropriate. A
Member shall not be refused such a request for two (2) consecutive years.
5.40.11 The workload of any or all Members shall be made known to the Union on request.
5.40.12 It is acknowledged that the provision of teaching assistants is a factor to be considered in the assignment of
workloads. As such the Vice-
President, Academic and Provost will ensure to the greatest degree possible the equitable distribution amongst the
Faculties of such assistance, consistent with the policies of Academic Councils.
ARTICLE 5.45 – ANNUAL REPORT FOR MEMBERS
5.45.1 All full-time Members, except those on sabbatical or study leave who have given prior notice to their
Dean/University Librarian of their intent to postpone submission until their return, shall submit a report in electronic and
paper format, on their activities for the preceding twelve (12) months to the Dean/University
Librarian, through the Chair/Director, by May 15. The report will cover all components of her/his responsibilities as listed
under Article 5.15 – Rights,
Responsibilities and Duties of Academics.
Members on sabbatical or study leave are covered by
Article 7.25 – Sabbatical Leaves and 7.30 – Study
Leave respectively.
5.45.2 In preparing their reports, Members shall use the appropriate standardised form developed for each
Faculty and the Library.
5.45.3 It is also the responsibility of the Members to provide annually an up-to-date and corrected curriculum vitae for their
personnel file.
ARTICLE 5.50 – ASSESSMENT OF A MEMBER'S
PERFORMANCE
5.50.1 When making assessments on contract renewal
(Article 5.20 – Appointment and Renewal), tenure
(Article 5.60 – Tenure Evaluation Procedures), promotion (Article 5.65 – Promotion Procedures) and merit increments
(Article 8.25 – Merit Increments), the assessors shall consider the Member’s performance in the areas outlined in Article
5.15 –
Rights, Responsibilities and Duties of Academics.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 83

Collective Agreement 2011-14
5.50.2 The assessors may consider as mitigating factors:
(a) The bilingual and tricultural character of
Laurentian University.
(b) In the case of Librarians, the amount of time available for scholarly activities.
5.50.3 The assessment of a Member's teaching performance shall be based on Senate approved course evaluations and
the Member's annual teaching dossier.
(a) During each term of the academic year, the
Employer shall administer the course evaluations approved by the Laurentian
University Senate. The Vice-President,
Academic and Provost shall be responsible for the distribution and collection of the said instruments. It is agreed that
Members shall have access to the results of course evaluations prior to their use by the University.
In the case of co-taught courses, the following shall apply:
(i) For courses co-taught sequentially, there shall be separate evaluations for each professor prior to the end of each
sequence.
(ii) For all other co-taught courses, the information provided to the assessors will indicate that the evaluation in question
shall be viewed with caution.
Should a Member feel that a course should be exempt from the approved evaluation process, reasons for exemption
should be addressed to the Vice-President, Academic and Provost no later than the end of the first week of classes in that
course. The Vice-President, Academic and
Provost will communicate her/his decision on the request prior to the planned date of the course evaluation.
(b) It is the responsibility of Members to maintain on an annual basis their teaching dossiers. For each course, the annual
dossier must contain at least the following material:
(i) Course syllabus and sufficient material to permit an evaluation of the contents of the course, the teaching/learning
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 84

Collective Agreement 2011-14 process, and the means of assessing the performance of the students.
(ii) Sufficient material to permit the evaluation of the Member's teaching performance as perceived by groups such as
graduates, peers, or students.
(iii) The file should also contain any other material that the Member deems relevant to her/his teaching role.
(iv) In the case of co-taught courses, the
Member shall include in the dossier information about which parts of the course/s fell within her/his responsibility for
course preparation, scheduled classroom, laboratory and tutorial time with students, evaluation of students, and course
administration.
(c) Assessors shall use the results of the teaching evaluations in their assessments with the understanding that these
evaluations comprise only one part of a Member’s teaching dossier.
5.50.4 Notwithstanding the priorities for teaching/librarianship and/or scholarly activities as noted in the various articles in
this Collective Agreement, the Parties recognise that the University benefits greatly from significant contributions in many
areas including academic administration and/or university governance, continuous involvement in a Member's
professional/learned society or in a community activity directly related to the work of the University. The
Parties agree that Members who have made such contributions shall have these contributions taken into especial account
as compensating for lesser performance in another area.
Notwithstanding the priorities for scholarly activities as noted in the various articles in this Collective
Agreement, the Parties recognise that the University benefits greatly from the contributions of Members who are
exceptional teachers. Members who can make such a contribution shall have this taken into especial account as
compensating for lesser performance in another area. When considering librarians, professional service and library
management skills shall be substituted for "teaching".
Assessment Procedures
5.50.5 The applicant shall submit her/his academic dossier to the Dean/University Librarian by July 1, who shall
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 85

Collective Agreement 2011-14 make a copy available to the Department/School by
September 1. Members of the Department/School who are eligible to participate in the assessment shall have access to
the applicant’s dossier. The applicant shall have the right to update her/his academic dossier until such time as the
Department/School has made its assessment. Any updates to the academic dossier shall be brought to the attention of
the Vice-
President, Academic and Provost before the decision is rendered.
5.50.6 No later than July 15, the Union shall receive from the
Employer a list of all applications being made by
Members during the current academic year.
5.50.7 The assessors shall put forward their recommendation in written form setting forth their findings and grounds for
recommendation in order that the applicant may know which factors were persuasive in a recommendation. In all
considerations of renewal, tenure, promotion and merit increments, the assessors shall use the following assessment
procedures:
Dean/University Librarian
(a) The Dean/University Librarian shall prepare an independent letter of assessment of the application. In assessing
applicants, the
Dean/University Librarian shall not see interna or external letters of assessment before submitting her/his own
independent letter of assessment of the applicant.
The Dean/University Librarian may take into account but not be limited to those parts of the applicant’s current personnel
file that are relevant to the matter being discussed. The applicant shall be provided with a list of material from the
personnel file that is being considered and that has not accompanied the application. In the case of applicants who submit
updates to their academic dossier before September 1, the Dean/University
Librarian shall consider such changes and amend the letter as necessary.
The Dean/University Librarian shall forward her/his own independent letter of assessment of the applicant simultaneously
to the Chair of the Faculty Personnel Committee and to the applicant by September 1 for renewal and tenure applications,
and by October 1 for promotion and merit applications. The applicant has the right to respond in writing to the
Dean’s/University Librarian’s independent letter of assessment of the applicant within five
(5) working days of its receipt. The applicant shall send her/his response, if any, directly to the Chair of the Faculty
Personnel Committee.
LUFA Collective Agreement July 2011 June 2014 FINAL english Page 86

Collective Agreement 2011-14
For promotions to the rank of Full
Professor/Librarian, the Dean/University
Librarian may append additional comments to the assessment within one (1) week of receiving the reports of the external
assessors.
These assessments shall be made available to
Members as soon as they are prepared and at least one (1) week before a Faculty Personnel
Committee considers a given case.
Department/School Assessment Committee
(b) Only tenured Members of the appropriate
Department(s)/School(s) are eligible to participate in the assessment process except under the circumstances defined in
paragraph
5.50.7 (i).
Each tenured Member has a responsibility to participate and to vote in the assessment process. Members on sabbatical
or other leaves, excluding leaves of absence without pay or long-term disability, have the right to participate and to vote in
the assessment process.
(c) In a timely fashion and with sufficient notice the Chair/Director of the Department/School or designate shall convene a
meeting of the eligible Members to assess the applicant’s academic dossier. Those eligible shall meet as often as
necessary for the purpose of writing a joint single letter of assessment for the application. A vote on the application shall
occur and be recorded. The eventual joint single letter of assessment shall be forwarded to the Chair of the relevant FPC.
(d) The proceedings of the meetings are to be undertaken in camera. It is understood that nothing in this Article shall
prevent a Member from discussing with the Union concerns abou potential breaches of the Collective
